Okay, we ready to go? Hello.
Phoebe, is it?
Yes. Hi, I'm here. Hello.
Hi, Phoebe.
I'm Dana. I'm the chair of the subcommittee.
And we are
here to hear from you about the Disability Support Services Bill, of course.
Mm-hmm.
You have five minutes with us, and you're welcome to use that as you
see fit-
Right. Thank you
... when you go through your submission.
Sometimes it's good to leave a question, but we'll leave that up to you to decide.
So I'll just start the timer and you can-
Yep
... get underway.
Groovy. Thank you.
So kia ora koutou. I'm Phoebe Eden-Mann.
I'm the national policy analyst for CCS Disability Action.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you guys about this today.
We do support the need for a strong legislative foundation for the disability
support services. However, we are deeply concerned that this bill in its
current form will cause avoidable and measurable
harm to disabled people and their whanau.
Our primary recommendation is that the Select Committee require the government to
rewrite the bill in full, following meaningful consultation with disabled
people, families, whanau, and representative
organizations. Our first concern is the lack of
consultation. The bill
got introduced with very limited to no
meaningful consultation,
despite the fact that it
directly affects disabled people's lives, independence, supports, and rights.
This falls short of our obligations under the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, particularly the requirement to closely
consult with and actively involve disabled people
in matters that affect them. The consultation period's also been too short,
particularly of a bill of this scale and for communities that rely on
accessible information and take some time to absorb it
and process it, and then provide their views.
Our second concern is Clause 8 for the proposed families first
principle. The bill places responsibility onto families and
whanau and other culturally recognized family groups before public support is
provided. This also defines family
extremely broadly, extending well beyond immediate
family. We believe that this is unreasonable.
Disabled people should not have to exhaust their family tree before receiving
basic disability support.
Family and whanau support is really important and it's deeply valued, but it cannot
replace publicly funded support.
Without clear limits, this bill risks making families responsible for lifelong
care, regardless of their capacity, well-being, health, or financial
situation. That's not sustainable, and it increases the
risk of isolation, poverty, burnout, and unsafe care
arrangements. It also undermines disabled people's rights to live
independently and to be included in the community,
which they're guaranteed under Article 19 of the rights
of the convention.
We're especially concerned about the impact on women, older carers, and families
who are already under pressure. Evidence cited in our submission shows
that most family and whanau carers are women. Many are older.
Many experience physical and financial relationship strain because of caring.
Disabled people and their families are also more likely to experience poverty.
Asking already stretched families to provide
more before publicly available support is available is both
unrealistic and harmful.
So in summary, CCS Disability Action recommends that
the bill be rewritten after meaningful consultation with disabled people and their
whanau. If the bill proceeds, we recommend drastically
narrowing the definition of family responsibility, setting clear
limits of what families are reasonably expected to provide,
requiring assessments for carer wellbeing and sustainability
to provide,
removing provisions to allow potential means testing, and
ensure any future disability support programs
uphold the rights of disabled people.
This bill affects the independence, dignity and safety and wellbeing of
disabled people across Aotearoa.
Nothing about us without us only works if the voices of disabled people are
present, and this bill has not only failed to seek out those
voices but will have negative impact for thousands
of disabled people and their loved ones.
We urge the committee to ensure that disabled people's voices are
central and that any future law strengthens rather than weakens their
rights and supports. Thank you, and I'm happy to take any questions if you have
any.
All right. Thank you.
Questions? Anyone?
I just have a point of clarification-
Yes
... Madam Chair.
Maureen.
Thanks very much for your submission, Chloe.
I just-
Phoebe.
Phoebe, sorry. My apologies.
You mentioned the issue around
using family support first.
Mm-hmm.
Just if you wish to get the
copy of the minister's first reading speech-
Mm-hmm
... she clarifies quite a few of the points that have been raised in your
submission. And using the family support
first is something that is already in practice
in terms of things like spectacles and
hearing aids maybe, or modifications to the house, ramps, et cetera.
Yeah.
So
to your point at the beginning, this is really just putting in place
legislation that reflects existing practice.
So I just wanted to give you some reassurance there.
It's-
Our concern is that this bill in its present form-
Yeah
... with the big
list of all the family members that you're expected to go through-
Mm-hmm
... which includes cousins, stepkids, all that-
Yep
... that is an unreasonably broad list, and that's not how it
currently is at the moment.
Yeah. And I take your point, the wording could be a lot clearer.
Mm.
And we've had that feedback from-
Yeah. So that's-
That's definitely-
That's our main concern is that as it is currently from the bill,
taken directly from the bill-
Yep
... that wording is c- cause of huge alarm
in the community. And
that's not the community's fault.
That's taken directly from their own government's legislation.
Yeah. And we've heard that feedback.
So that's our concern.
Great. I think that's-
We'll get that up
... very clear, Phoebe. Thank you.
Thank you.
And appreciate your submission. Thanks for taking the time to come and talk to us.
Thank you very much. Bye.
Thank you.
We will move on to Complex Care
Group submission.
Do we have Sheree? We heard from Sheree the other day, I think.
Is she online?
Yeah. She's online. Is it Lisa Martin? Yeah.
Oh, Lisa Martin.
Right. I'll get Sheree from-- Oh, Sheree's on here.
Oh, prepared by Sheree and Lisa.
And both.
Right.
Lisa, are you with us? Can you hear us?
Kia ora. Yes, I am.
Oh, kia ora. Hello, how are you today?
Good, good, thank you.
Excellent. Nice to see you. If you would like to
go through your submission, you've got five minutes with us, and we'll
maybe if there's some time for some questions at the end.
But otherwise, over to you how you use your time.
Thank you. My name is Lisa Martin. I'm the director of Complex Care
Group Trust, and I'm pleased to have the opportunity to share the insights and the
expertise of our organization with the Select Committee for the Disability
Support Services Bill. Complex Care Group is a disability
information advisory service predominantly assisting family
members of those with very high and complex disability needs.
And this is largely due to the nature of complex disabilities, where the
disabled person often does not have the ability to
communicate their own preferences, and for this, they depend
instead on those who deeply know and understand them, which is usually
close family.
Our main concerns about the Disability Support Services Bill,
family to hold responsibility for the care of the disabled person
in the first instance.
Families already turn to family first.
From infancy through childhood, it is typical to call upon family
first to take up kind offers of support from family and friends.
This becomes exponentially more difficult as the profoundly disabled
child grows older. To insist on family first
responsibility could put families at risk from physical injuries
and psychological trauma, especially if it involves extended
family who do not regularly provide such support.
The type of care required often involves lifting,
transferring, use of hoists, tube feeding,
oxygen use, et cetera.
Care of those with high and complex needs represents significant time,
patience, and expertise in exactly which supports are required
when and how, and why. Extended family
will likely lack training and expertise in the correct methods of providing care
and behavior management, et cetera.
Families are already exhausted. We know of some families who literally
provide support around the clock, and whilst there may be support workers
involved for some care needs, parents still contribute
extraordinarily high levels of support.
It is already family who fills the gap when support workers are unwell or
taking leave.
Risk of abuse, either from exhausted parents to the disabled
person or the disabled person to the family member.
The loss of choice and control around who can be a disabled person's support
worker could lead to immense frustration and distress for the
disabled person. Child to parent violence and abuse is a
very real thing.
Families are often dispersed across the motu or the globe.
There is no guidance in the bill as to how stringently family first
will be imposed. Family first does not seem practical in
2026 New Zealand when family members will have their own
careers, families, and commitments of their own.
The remarkably detailed list of what comprises family is
worrying. There is no guidance in the bill regarding which
circumstances might require not only parents, but siblings,
aunts, uncles, and even first cousins to
become caregivers. Requiring family first
involvement does risk fracturing family relationships.
Means testing in the same way the detailed list of family could be
interpreted as meaning that extended family members may be
means or asset tested for their disabled
family member.
Means testing preferably needs to be removed from the bill or
significantly clarified. It is said that means testing
already exists only for two supports.
Equipment and modification services and household management
requires a community services card, and means or
income testing is certainly not the only eligibility requirement for
those supports.
Means testing or income testing is likely to produce unintended
consequences. Money is likely to be spent or protected in a
trust to avoid scrutiny. And how can it be
equitable for a family who has assets that are not protected
in a trust to be required to pay?
The intended elimination of paid family carers, who are
commonly parents, is problematic.
The choice to become a paid family carer is not always a choice.
It's often driven by the lack of suitably trained or experienced staff.
Constant staff turnover drives many parents to provide the care
themselves to ensure continuity and less stress for the
disabled person. Removing this option for carers to be
paid will require them to turn to other paid work, and
a greater number of support workers will be required.
Where will they come from? Exactly who provides support should
be a choice. Paid family members, or family being
employed by a provider organization, or the employment of external
staff. These are the choices that need to be retained so disabled
people and families can select the best option for them.
We request the bill be abolished and a fresh approach involving
consultation prior to the writing of a disability support services
bill is undertaken. Family carers have huge
wisdom to share. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Lisa. Very good submission, and I note your
recommendations in the back of your submission, which we will take note of.
Sadly, we've run out of time for questions, but
we will definitely look at your recommendations, which were very clear. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thanks for your time.
Okay.
Next is Parent/Family/Whānau Network.
Kia ora.
Rebecca. Yes, Dr Rebecca Graham. All right.
Please,
yes, go ahead with your submission. You've got five minutes.
You can see the dreaded clock up there.
Tēnā koutou katoa.
I am Rebecca Graham, and I am the chair of the Parent/Family/Whānau
Network. The network is a collective of nationally relevant grassroot
organizations that variously represent the shared lived experience of
parents and whānau within the disability sector.
We have extensive lived experience and sector knowledge of the realities of
caring and being family within a disability context.
Network members would have been more than happy to share our
expertise and knowledge with the minister in developing this bill.
We were never asked.
We did not even know about this bill until it was before Parliament.
Disabled people have generously expended their time, energy, and
resource over this week to share their knowledge and expertise.
I'm immensely proud to be part of such a generous, caring, and diverse sector.
Diversity means we often disagree,
yet this bill has united us. Disabled people, families,
advocates, carers, organizations,
services, and providers have all found this bill to be deeply
flawed. When the whole sector is united,
it is sensible to listen.
The minister tells us that this bill sets the legislative foundations for
disability support services.
Foundations determine what gets built next.
This legislation is not just about what happens now or today, but about
what it will allow to happen tomorrow.
As currently written, the bill does not provide a solid, safe,
and secure foundation for disability supports and allows far
too much uncertainty for what might happen tomorrow.
As noted by others, Clause 8 does not allow
disabled people to have choice and control over their lives,
including over who provides their care.
Part 1 of the bill defines family extremely broadly, and this
broad definition creates an ever-increasing circle of responsibility for
families.
The bill provides no safeguards or limits when it
comes to expectations on family care.
There is no age of majority in this bill,
and there is no age at which family is no longer considered
responsible for their disabled family member.
There is no limit in this bill on the care expected by
family and no government responsibility towards families.
Families have asked to partner with government, receive adequate payment and
recognition for their care work, and to have choice and control over the care
they provide.
This bill does not currently provide for this adequately.
Worryingly,
the bill sets the foundations for burnout, harm, and overwhelm for families.
It legislates via Clause 8 into law the very conditions that lead to
abuse and neglect.
The recent findings from the Royal Commission of Inquiry into Abuse and State Care
were clear. Disabled people must have their rights and
protections embedded into legislation.
Human rights obligations, including the UNCRPD, must
be embedded into law, and the law must guarantee disabled individuals the
right to choose their care arrangements.
Disability support services must be appropriately monitored,
regulated, and funded to ensure that disability supports are
safe and abuse-free.
These recommendations by the Royal Commission are not currently and fully
upheld in the current bill.
Foundational disability legislation must set the groundwork for
abuse-free, neglect-free lives.
It must be done in partnership with disabled people in their communities, and it
must uphold and center the rights of disabled people and families.
We know from our history that we cannot blindly trust the
government, but that our rights must be upheld in legislation.
We need this bill to uphold rights and protections, not expose
us all to potential harm.
We recommend, along with the previous submitters, starting again in
consultation with disabled people and their families. Ga-mai.
Oh, thank you very much
for your submission.
Do we have any questions of the submitter? Sorry.
Maureen's having a small
moment.
Look, I think it's pretty clear what you have to say.
I guess my question was, I noted you
talked about partnering with government,
and choice and control
of the outcomes is what people want.
What does that look like for you?
In terms of being a family member, choice and control means
that
when we are talking about funding and going through the NASC process and talking
about what works for our family,
is being able to say, "Actually, I don't want to be a paid carer for my
child, but what would work for us and our family is being able to employ
someone else." Or, "Actually, what would work for us is to be able to have some
informal care arrangements where we can provide a koha so we're not draining
family, but we're not necessarily entering into that formal employment
contract." And it means having that trust base with the
person that you're having those conversations with, your NASC or your EGL,
and being able to work out what's going to work best for the whole
family.
Mm.
And yes, family provides care. I think we all agree that that
happens.
But the way it's currently legislated is really worrying
because of what it allows and the lack of safeguards for
family. And I think it's really important that legislation has
safeguards and really important that legislation doesn't
inadvertently create conditions that can be misinterpreted
or abused.
Okay. That's a good answer. Thank you very much.
Thank you.
Thank you for your time and thank you for coming in today.
All right. Te Tohu o Whakaha Mihini.
The Anglican Disability Network.
I think they will not serve today. Yeah. Come back to them?
Mm-hmm. Okay. We'll go on now
to the FASD
CAN Incorporated, Ross Porter. Ross, yeah.
Are they online?
Right. Got some
worries.
Mm.
All right. Who do we have, sorry? We've got Ross Porter here.
Ross Porter. FASD
CAN Incorporated. I'm sure he will
help me understand what that is,
stands for.
Kia ora koutou. My name is Ross Porter.
I'm a board member of FASD CAN Incorporated.
It's a national charitable organization representing people living with fetal
alcohol spectrum disorder and families and whanau who support
them.
Ross, we can't see you and that's fine if that's how you want it to be.
Oh, I'm sorry. I-
Just letting you know if you were-
Understood.
... wondering why we're not looking at you.
I'm just finding where to click. There we go.
It doesn't improve much when I turn the video on, I'm afraid to say.
Okay. I think just carry on. We don't seem to be able to.
Yeah.
Oh.
Oh, there we go. That looks more hopeful. There we are. Happy days. Right.
Shall we just start again, shall we?
Given that you...
One moment.
Right. Away you go, Ross.
My name's Ross Porter. I'm a board member of FASD CAN Incorporated.
It's a national charitable organization representing people living
with fetal alcohol spectrum disorder
and families and whanau who support them.
FASD is a lifelong disability. People living with it
typically have profound challenges with memory, decision-making,
impulse control,
and understanding consequences.
Many need support every day, not just as children, but throughout their
adult lives. There is no cure for FASD.
Right now, only around one in five people we represent qualify for
disability support services because of how eligibility is currently
defined. The other 80% are left without funded
support, relying almost entirely on their families.
That's already an injustice, and this bill, as drafted, risks
making it permanent and worse.
Our most serious concern is Clause 11, the power given to the minister alone
to determine who is eligible for disability support.
To explain why this matter, I just want to tell you about a typical family
situation.
Their adult son, I'll call him James, has FASD along with an
intellectual disability. His IQ has been assessed at 68, so
he does qualify for disability support services.
Qualifying on paper and actually receiving reliable support
has turned out to be two very different things.
James is 26,
can't manage money, can't hold down a job.
He cannot live safely alone.
His mother has been his carer since he was born.
She's now in her late 50s. She has her own health problems,
and she has almost no savings because she gave up her career to take up
part-time work, which allows her to care for him.
Even with James meeting the eligibility criteria, his mother has spent years
fighting the system just to get the level of support he's entitled to.
His funding has been reassessed and reduced twice.
This is what happens to a family today under a system that already involves a
measure of administrative discretion.
Clause seven, allowing the minister to redefine who qualifies
and on what terms without
parliamentary scrutiny and democracy, not requiring consultation with
the Disability Community Panel- It could be changed in time.
It's creating a lot of uncertainty for those families,
and probably fear of what might happen.
Clause eight, the family first principle, means that whenever
support is reduced or delayed, James' mother will be
expected to fill the gap with no assessment of what that costs
her in terms of her health or
her financial position. We're not asking
the
committee to oppose the bill. We accept that a legislative framework is
needed following the Fleming judgment.
What we are asking is that parliament,
not a minister acting alone, retains meaningful control over who
receives disability support.
I've got some recommendations here, but hopefully you've got my submission in front
of you, and you'll just-
Yes
... take them from that.
Yes, we do.
So in closing,
the families we represent are not asking to be relieved of their love or
commitment. They are asking to be treated honestly and fairly, to have some
certainty that they will not be asked to carry an unlimited burden
without support, without acknowledgment, and without any recourse to when they
reach their limit.
James' mother deserves better than that, and so does James.
So do the families who don't even have what little certainty he has.
Incidentally, James has a friend
who
also has a diagnosis of FASD and lives with many of the same
challenges as James,
i.e., deficits in a number of his brain domains,
but he has an IQ of 75. Therefore, he isn't
currently eligible for DSS at all.
I'd just like to say, ngā mihi, thanks for listening, and if you've got any
questions, I'll see if I can answer them.
Yes.
Dr David Wilson.
Yeah. Thank you, Ross. Could you give us an idea of some of the reasons that-
Chair
... people with FASD are declined?
Next.
Simply because they don't have
an IQ below-
75 ... 70, actually.
And in fact, if you click on the NASC's website,
you'll see some of them avoid the
grief of having to deal with us by saying, "Please don't apply if you
have FASD,"
without an intellectual disability.
Yep, I can see your concern.
It's incredible, I would have to say.
Look, thank you very much, Ross. I think you make yourself very clear, and
we will take into account your recommendations when we are
deliberating later on and looking at the bill itself.
So thank you for your time,
and well communicated to us. Thank you.
Thanks. Thank you very much. Ngā mihi.
Excellent. So we will move now to the Hastings District Council Disability
Reference Group.
We get Eloise.
Eloise,
can you hear us?
There we go.
Kia ora.
Kia ora. Can you hear us?
Yes, we can hear you, and we can see you. Thank you very much.
You have five minutes with us. I'm Dana.
I'm the chair of the committee. We have your submission in front of
us, but we're very pleased to hear from you, so please go ahead.
And if there's time for questions at the end, we will ask those if we're within
time.
Fantastic. Thank you, Dana. My name is Nick Ratcliffe.
I'm a Hastings district counselor.
I chair the disability advisory group here.
I'm actually going to hand over to one of our members,
Debbie Ward. We've got about six members in the room here with us.
Ah.
I'm going to hand over to Debbie to present our
oral submission.
Kia ora. Kia ora koutou katoa.
Kia ora.
Ko Debbie Ward toku ingoa, and it's my pleasure today
to represent the voice of the Hastings District Council's
disability advisory group, of whom I'm a member as a
resident of Hastings.
Really, in our submission, we've put that we would like
for this bill to be paused and
undertake further development rather than progressing it
as it is.
We'd like to see some co-design of the legislation with the disability
community to ensure that it reflects
the real experience and needs of the disabled
people
and their whanau. To build in clear safeguards and accountability
mechanisms, including transparency and review
of rights.
And clarify the key elements up front around eligibility,
supports, and processes instead of deferring them to later
decisions.
We'd like to see improvement in the consultation practices,
ensuring accessibility, time, and support so that
disabled people can meaningfully participate in their
communities.
We believe that the bill-- So the question you asked
was: What changes do we want to see to the bill?
It should be redeveloped in a genuine partnership with disabled
people, whanau, carers, providers, and representative
organizations.
This legislation must clearly define eligibility,
access to supports, safeguards, reviews,
rights, and transparent decision-making processes.
The role of natural supports should not replace funded supports
or place unreasonable pressure on families.
And there should be adequate consultation time frames,
accessible information, and proper support to enable meaningful
participation. Many disabled people and whanau have
indicated that they would have loved to have had an opportunity to put a submission
in, but the time frame was just not
enough for them to do it in a way that was meaningful for them.
What is our biggest
concerns?
There are several major concerns that we have with the bill.
Over-reliance on natural supports, potentially shifting
responsibility onto families and carers.
Lack of detail in the bill, with too much left to future
regulations and policy designs.
In essence, the biggest concern is that the bill creates significant risk
to access, fairness, and accountability in disability
support services due to weak design and poor consultation.
We would love to be able to answer any questions.
Thank you very much. It was a very good submission.
Do we have questions from the committee? Maureen Pugh.
No.
No? Oh.
No, but I do thank you for your
recommendations and your submission.
And I
would also refer submitters, as I have done before, to the minister,
Louise Upston's first reading speech in the House, which
gives a lot more context
to the bill that we have in front of us.
But I can assure you that the intention for
the remainder of the secondary legislation
will be done in consultation. This is providing the platform.
And
so business as usual. This is not
going to affect any existing entitlements or
service to the disabled community.
But I do appreciate that some of the wording could be
improved so that that misunderstanding is cleared
up.
And I think there's a lot of anxiety out there in the community.
Mm-hmm.
Around this has created a lot of fear, anxiety, and
unnecessary stress, and I think that wording should be corrected
immediately and become inaccessible in
alternate formats where everyone can understand it.
Yes, I agree. Mm.
Yeah.
Thank you, Maureen. My understanding is that,
as you say,
the existing situation isn't meant to change in terms of funding.
In fact, we've funded more, but clearly
the wording in the legislation doesn't reflect that,
so it's created this situation. So thank you very much for
your great submission.
Kia ora to all of your colleagues in the room with you from here in
Wellington and we thank you very much for your time today.
Thank you.
Tena koutou.
Kia ora.
Okay.
Where are we up to, team?
Neuroscience. Neuroscience and Trauma-Informed Network Aotearoa.
Online? Mm-hmm. Yes. Perfect.
All right.
Okay. Do we have
Frian, Friane
with us?
Yes.
Kia ora.
Oh, kia ora. How are you? I'm Dana.
Good.
Nice to meet you. I'm the chair of the subcommittee here to
hear you today. So you have five minutes.
Please use that time as you see fit.
Kia ora. Tena koutou katoa.
Thank you first of all for this opportunity to present orally.
Ko Frian Waria toku ingoa. I am first and foremost a parent
of three young adults with disabilities and neurodivergence,
and the founder and chairperson for NATINA,
which is the Neuroscience and Trauma-Informed Network Aotearoa.
I'm also an early intervention specialist, an
advocate in the community, and I'm a huge
promoter for systemic change that upholds inclusion, disability
rights, and well-being for our disabled children, adults, and the families.
NATINA is a charitable trust established by myself and other community
members in response to the trauma, discrimination
which we have experienced as families, members of disabled
people because of the ongoing discrimination, systemic
barriers, inadequate supports, and resources.
Our work is grounded in the belief that every person deserves to live with dignity,
belonging, and equitable opportunities to thrive.
So to answer your questions, what changes do we want to
see? We want to see
the bill ensure that disabled people over the age of
will be supported by the government of Aotearoa, New Zealand in a way that
guarantees access to the disability supports and services they
need to live a good, meaningful life and fully
realize their rights and potential.
We also ask that the bill removes the expectation that family members
will provide ongoing care and support for disabled adults.
For many families, this is simply not sustainable.
This is not because families lack love, commitment, or care for their
disabled person. Rather, many have already endured years
of hardship, discrimination, inequity, inadequate
supports, financial pressure, systemic barriers that
have impacted their own health and well-being.
Expecting families to carry lifelong caring responsibilities
without adequate supports is neither fair nor realistic.
What is our biggest concern? Our greatest concern is that the bill
creates uncertainty about the future eligibility and access
to disability supports By insisting on natural
supports first and allowing significant decisions to be made by
ministers without sufficient safeguards or meaningful
consultation with disabled people and their whānau.
In short, it increases the risk for trauma and
inequity for disabled people and their families.
What is our proposed solution? So we ask the committee to ensure that
all future decisions, amendments, considerations, implementation
of this bill are guided by trauma-informed
principles. And the principles I'm going to go by one by one.
This means upholding safety by ensuring disabled people and their whānau are
heard, valued, and supported.
It means demonstrating trustworthiness and transparency by removing
any loopholes that could allow future changes which
reduce supports or disadvantage disabled people without appropriate
accountability or consultation.
It means promoting choice, voice, and autonomy by protecting
disabled people's rights to make decisions about their own
lives and who supports them, how and where.
It means fostering collaboration and mutuality by
partnering with disabled people, whānau, disability organizations,
and Māori throughout the legislation and policy
development process,
now and in the future. It means supporting empowerment
by ensuring you give regard to all the submissions made by
disabled people and the community, and recognize their
strengths, knowledge, and lived experience that we carry.
Finally, it means embracing cultural, historical, and equity
responsiveness by recognizing the government's
obligations to Te Tiriti o Waitangi, UNCRPD, giving
regard to the outcomes from the abuse in care inquiry, addressing
inequities experienced by Māori, Pacific, and other marginalized
communities, and ensuring the disability support system is
equitable, inclusive, and accessible for all.
So a trauma-informed Disability Support Services Act would not simply
reduce harm, it would actively create the conditions for disabled
people and their whānau to flourish through choice and
autonomy for themselves.
Thank you so much. I'm happy to take any questions if you've
got any.
Questions, team?
No. I'm grateful for the recommendations, though. They're very helpful.
Yeah. The recommendations are great. So thank you very much for those.
We will be pulling out recommendations from everybody-
Yeah
... as I've gone through and in making sure we cover them off as we
talk through the report back stage.
So thank you very much for being with us today. We appreciate your submission.
Kia ora.
We are now going back to Te Taura
Whakaha Mihi Nei,
Mihi Nari. I know I may have said that wrong. The Anglican Disability Network.
Kia ora.
I
didn't think I will get to
speak today, but yet
here I
participate.
I'm
sorry that I
hadn't been able to
prepare a
paper for you, but I
hope you can
understand me.
I want to say today
that
we are concerned that this
bill does not
take into account
the work
that's been done in
partnership with
disabled people over the
last
20 years.
Nothing about us without
us.
We are
all
human beings, have
dignity, and we should
have been asked to
participate in this
project.
I think
while
I agree with this
bill being around now,
I agree that a
legislated framework
should, for
disability support
services, should be
put in place.
And that
is
the only thing about this
bill I agree with,
because
families
should need to take
responsibility for all
its citizens.
And while families are
very, very important
into a lot of care.
I think that we think
that the state
need to
be the provider of
disability support
services, and that
these support services
are not means tested.
And we are
also concerned about the
ministerial programs
that could be
developed with the
disability community.
We need to work together
and it feels like it's
happening both
on at, from
the top down,
and we know that we are
the experts in our
own lives, and we need to
work together to make
sure that all
disabled people
are heard and
are getting the
support.
We all need to fight and
let life
to
turn more.
And that is my
submission.
Oh, thank you so much for your submission.
It was very good. You've put a lot of thought into it.
But I think it's pretty clear
what you are asking of the committee to consider.
So, I want to thank you very much for spending the time with us today.
Thank you.
That was good. All right, our next submitter is Ngā Homie.
Yes. Online?
Yes.
Great.
Okay. Ngā Homie is... Yes, here we go.
Here we go. Emily. Is it Emily?
Yes.
Emily and Hannah-
Yes
... is what I've got down here. All right. Nice to meet you.
We have five minutes to hear from you.
We have your submission in front of us, so please,
you can take it from here.
Awesome. Kia ora koutou. So me and Emily will be doing an
oral submission against this bill on behalf of Ngā Homie, which is a
Rangatahi Māori-led community organization based in
Kirikiriroa Hamilton. But we have members across the country.
So just before I start,
I whakapapa to Te Atanga Mahaki o Rongo Whakata Ngāi Tahu.
Nice. Like us. Same.
As I actually have a great-grandfather who's a Kirkpatrick in Gisborne, so there's
probably-
Oh, fantastic
... whānau connection there.
So yeah, kia ora.
There you go. Be careful what you wish for.
And then on my father's side, I whakapapa to Scotland.
And I'm a student at the University of Waikato.
I also have whānau who are support workers or work
closely with people with disabilities in the health sector.
So yeah. Tena koutou. Pass to Emily. Kia ora.
Hi, I'm Emily, and I'm just going to kind of share my
perspective
as someone with a disability.
So,
I oppose this bill because I believe it changes the direction of disability
support in Aotearoa in ways that could have long-lasting
consequences for people like me. I live with an extremely rare
connective tissue genetic condition.
It affects every aspect of my daily life, but it has never impacted
me for what I want for my future. To me, my future looks like
continuing to learn, enjoying my life, contributing
to my community, while making my own decisions, and living as
independently as I can.
Avenues like disability support have helped
make these things possible. I have not
been dependent on whānau, and this support has allowed me to
explore self-determination separate from
them. When I read this bill, I worried that disability
support is being left for vague interpretation from
future ministers and policymakers.
This bill evokes feelings of uncertainty for my future and my
disabled peers. I believe behind the scenes, these
political barriers should not
last things we need to be concerned with.
Should be the last things we should be concerned with.
I'm also worried about the language used in this bill suggesting that family is a
natural support for people with disabilities.
Although I can acknowledge that family support sounds ideal, I
believe from experience fosters isolation,
dependence, and a mundane existence.
In contrast, having outside influences like carers
opens opportunities for new perspectives.
Outside perspectives and life experiences enabled by
quality care are gateways to an equitable and dignified
life.
Getting carer support based on assets and income is another concern to me
regarding this bill. From my perspective, this has little to do with the child
or person with disability.
The person with disability should not be missing out on an outside care based on
their family's income or assets. It further removes autonomy.
Another important consideration, their income does not directly link
to having quality family care and a positive life.
I also have concerns surrounding the quality of care provided by family.
Capacity
is a consideration. Not to undermine the likely love and effort
put into caring for their family member with a disability, but
family members should be able to also exercise their
self-determination. From experience, this may lead to increased
family conflict and struggles that are entirely
unavoidable and inequitable.
I'm not asking for charity. I'm asking for the opportunity to continue
to live a meaningful life with dignity, fairness, and independence,
without the uncertainty of losing access to an amazing
life-changing support.
Support for disabilities should be prioritized. Thank you.
Thank you.
That was fantastic. Thank you so much,
both of you, for bringing your thoughts today.
Does anyone have any question or comment to
pass on?
I'd just make a comment-
Sure
... that she made here.
Thanks so much for the feedback.
What I think the minister has set out to
do is to lay the foundation in this legislation
for what is currently common practice, that this is
business as usual, and then the fine-tuning will be done,
and the minister has given her full commitment to doing this in
full consultation with the disability sectors.
Sorry.
So
I do appreciate that some of the wording has
created a bit of a fright in the sector.
But I think the government's commitment to nearly $2 billion
more funding, is a signal that we want to do this
well, and unfortunately, we've gotten off to a
bad start.
Yeah.
Look, thank you so much, both of you, for coming today
and for sharing your thoughts. I do have to ask, where are you?
You look like you're in the shed.
We're actually on the campus.
Right.
Yeah. The university went for the rustic look for the new part.
Okay. All good. Thank you so much. And look, go well,
and we appreciate your submission. It's very well-received. Thank you.
Thank you.
Next, we have Te Ropu Taurima.
Yes, Karen, is it?
Yeah. Kia ora.
Yeah. Kia ora. Perhaps you'd like to introduce yourselves before we get underway.
Kia ora. Manu Sione, I'm chair of Te Ropu Taurima.
Nice to meet you.
Yeah. Kia ora. I'm Karen Smith.
Awesome.
Nice to meet you both. You have
five minutes. We do have your submission,
so please, if you feel like leaving some time for a question at the end, do so.
Otherwise, it's up to you how you use your time.
Okay.
Mm-hmm.
Tena koutou nga mema o tenei committee. Ano te korero no Te Ropu Taurima.
Established in 1999, Te Ropu Taurima is a kaupapa Māori
disability support provider that stretches from Kai I Tai to
Otautahi who supports tangata whaikaha with wide-ranging
intellectual and physical impairments.
So we emerged out of the deinstitutionalization era that occurred in the late
1980s, 1990s, and
specifically responded to whanau who sought a specific kaupapa Māori
service from mainstream services for tangata whaikaha
whanau who had been part of the disability system for most of their lives.
So Te Ropu Taurima remains that support service for those tangata whaikaha
who are now kaumatua and many more even to this day.
Underpinned by tikanga Māori, we seek to uphold the mana and unique
identity of every individual we support, and our service delivery
model includes a social perspective of inclusiveness based on human
rights principles where diversity and disability must be
respected and supported in all their forms.
Today, that alignment exists within the current disability
support system,
and you might hear that spoken about using words like enabling good lives,
tino rangatiratanga, and self-determination.
And it's at this point that I want to acknowledge the long-ranging impact of
decisions made by lawmakers of the past and regulators on tangata
whaikaha and their whanau to draw attention to what comes next from
this bill and this process going forward.
Our tangata must be supported to continue how they have been enabled to
live everyday lives within a support system that provides for tino
rangatiratanga. Cares and supports for them are upheld by a balance
of whanau, community, government support, and adequate
safeguards which provide safety and protection and preservation of the mana of our
taonga.
In its current setting, I feel that the right to self-determination is not
guaranteed where there are more powers provided to a party, in
particular a minister or a different kind of minister,
where an imbalance of power would not necessarily be felt by those who live
within it.
So in addition to our written submission, there are two main changes that we would
like to see to the bill. The first one being change the timeline for this
kaupapa. Allow for adequate consultation to occur to
draw from a well-informed population through their experiences of the system
and over a timeframe that provides for a good korero.
Waiho i te toi poto, kaua i te toi roa: let us keep
close together and not far apart. Number two-
Ensure critical rights, safeguards, eligibility settings,
review processes, and accountability mechanisms are clearly set out
in the primary legislation. Ko te piko o te māhure te
ra te tupu o te rākau. The way the young sapling is nourished determines
how the tree will grow.
I would now like to outline our two biggest concerns.
The evolution of the disability support system should not be shaped
within a timeframe as short as this one has been.
This short process has excluded many from participating.
We've heard this three times already today.
Mā mātou, anō mātou e kōrero. Nothing about us without us.
Number two, whānau support must be recognized and valued, but
it must never be presumed, required, or used as a substitute for
adequately funded disability support services.
Unuhia te reto o te harakeke, kei where te kōmako e kō.
Remove the heart of the flax bush, where will the bellbird sing?
So our recommendation and proposed solutions
are, firstly,
restart the legislative process through genuine partnership and co-design with
tāngata whaikaha, whānau, providers, and representative
organizations. E kukkuri te pōko, e
ketekete te kāka, e kūkū te kereru.
We also have a voice that needs to be respected.
Secondly, ensuring critical rights and safeguards,
eligibility settings, review processes and
mechanisms are clearly set out in the primary legislation as mentioned, and that
means strengthening protections for disabled people and their whānau,
including advocacy, appeals, transparency, and independent
oversight.
In conclusion, the same way principles of the disability support
system have evolved over time to support our tāngata to live everyday lives,
this process in which that happened must too evolve.
So we must draw on the lessons of the past and provide opportunities for
participation, protection, and progression, and invite supported
decision-making and genuine engagement.
Poia te kākano kia puawai. Nurture the seed so it blooms.
Tāngata iratanga mō tātou katoa i runga i ngā tikanga o
tēnā, o tēnā. Nō reira, kua mutu te kōrero o Te Rōpū
Tairawhiti. Kia ora koutou.
Kia ora. Thank you. Look at you go.
I have a quick question.
Yes. Make it snappy.
In your written submission, it's item number four, you talk
about
the safeguards and access to advocacy
and appeal. It's come up before in submissions about the
appeal provision-
Mm
... or a
appeal provision and a complaints pathway as
well.
Mm.
Would you support the bill being extended to include those?
Most likely.
Okay.
Thank you very much.
Where have you come from today?
Uh, Tāmaki.
Oh, you have?
Mm-hmm.
Our board was adamant, unanimous to be face to face with you.
Wonderful.
Even though we had five minutes-
No
... it was about kanohi ki te kanohi.
Uh. Kia ora.
Kia ora.
Thank you very much for making the long journey to come and talk with us.
We really appreciate it.
My white cane, just to remember where-
Yes.
Yeah.
Kia ora.
Thank you. Safe travels.
Thank you.
All right, our next submitter is Your Way Ki Oroha
Charitable Trust.
And it says by Zoom, but here you are.
I am here
You've materialized-
In person
... in front of us. That's fantastic.
All right. You know the drill then, I'm sure.
We will restart the dreaded clock, and welcome to the
committee, and we look forward to hearing from you.
We do have your submission in front of us. Thank you.
Tēnā koutou katoa.
Thank you.
Thank you for the opportunity to present on our submission.
My name is Megan Thomas, and I am the chief executive representing Your Way
Ki Oroha, who is a needs assessment and service coordination provider
across five regions. We allocate disability support
services to around 8,500 people.
We see every day how this legislation will affect
disabled people, whānau, and frontline decision-making.
We support the need for a clear legislative foundation for
disability support services, but we do not support this
bill proceeding in its current form.
What are the changes that we want to see?
First, we want the bill changed so that the core rights,
protections, and accountability settings are in primary
legislation itself, not deferred to a later
phase or left to ministerial direction.
The purpose clause should be rewritten so disability support
services are clearly about enabling people to live
independently, participate in community life, and
exercise choice and control. The principles
clause should be changed so it does not presume family and
whānau responsibility in the first instance.
Families and whānau are vital. They provide love, knowledge,
advocacy, and care that no formal system can replace.
But family support should not become a reason for the state to
step back or for unpaid care to be assumed
without clear limits.
What is our biggest concern?
Our biggest concern is that this bill creates the
appearance of a legislative framework while leaving too
much of its substance uncertain, discretionary,
and incomplete. That uncertainty becomes
inconsistent assessment,
unexplained funding decisions, families being asked to
do more without any real test of capacity or
safety, and further loss of trust in a
system that already feels very hard to navigate
For example, a decision about respite is not just a
funding decision. It may decide whether an aging parent,
a single parent, or a stretched whānau can keep going safely.
If a person disagrees with that decision, they should not have
to guess how to challenge it.
The oral submissions this committee has heard echo the same
themes. The process feels rushed, the bill does not
reflect meaningful co-design, and too much detail
is left outside the act. The committee should treat that not
as resistance to change, but as evidence that the
bill, as drafted, is not yet fit for purpose.
What would our solution be?
Our solution is to pause and substantially redraft the
bill with disabled people, whānau, carers, and other sector
experts, so the essential rights, safeguards,
review pathways, allocation principles, and limits
on delegated powers are in the act before it proceeds.
If the government's intention is consistency,
fairness, transparency, and sustainability, those
things must be built into the legislation, not promised
later. The fundamentals should be set by Parliament,
the purpose of support, the principles for decision-making,
people's rights, and checks on the system.
This committee's task is to scrutinize whether the bill is
lawful, workable, fair, and worthy of the people it will
affect. This last month should have been a month of
celebration as disabled people, their family, and whānau
celebrated finally seeing a strong legislative framework
they'd been involved in developing come to Parliament.
A piece of legislation that affirmed their rights and provided
clarity on how Aotearoa upholds and respects all
citizens.
Instead, Parliament are looking to pass legislation that
weakens accountability, narrows public responsibility, and
postpones basic protections.
We ask this committee to recommend that the bill does not proceed
in its current form. If it proceeds, it must be
substantially amended so disabled people and whānau can
see themselves in this law as citizens
whose rights, dignity, and futures matter. Thank you.
Excellent. Thank you very much
for your submission. I think it's fairly clear
how you have set it out, and I appreciate the
bullet points in your conclusion that have pretty much set out what you think needs
to happen.
Mm-hmm.
It's very helpful.
Thank you.
So thank you for coming, and thank you for
what is a very good submission.
Thank you.
The New Zealand Down Syndrome Association.
Are they with us in person or... Yes.
On Zoom.
On Zoom. Okay.
Fabulous.
Kia ora.
Okay.
Kia ora koutou katoa.
Kia ora. How are you? I'm Dana. I'm the chair of the committee.
It's nice to have you with us. You have five minutes.
We do have your submission in front of us, so please assume that we have read it.
Kia ora. Thank you. Thank you to the chair and members of the committee for the
opportunity to speak today. My name is Zandra Vacarino.
I'm the national executive officer of the New Zealand Down Syndrome Association
and a co-facilitator of the Family Leadership Alliance.
I also speak from a lived experience as the mother and mother-in-law of a son and
daughter-in-law with Down syndrome, and as someone who lives with a disability.
The New Zealand Down Syndrome Association does not support the Disability
Services Bill in its current form. We believe this bill needs to pause.
It requires significant amendment.
It has not been genuinely co-designed with disabled people, whānau, and
DPOs, and without this, there is a real risk of harm to
disabled people and their whānau.
These concerns are not ours alone.
You will hear, or you have heard, the same message from EGL, the
Parent Family Network, Carers New Zealand, DPOs, providers,
and many others. This is a consistent message across the disability
community. This past week, I facilitated a workshop with people with
Down syndrome. I asked them, "What matters most to you?" Their answer
was clear:
"We want to make our own choices." Parents and whānau consistently
tell me the same thing. They want self-determination, choice, and control over
their own lives, and for their family members to have the same.
Every disabled person is different. Every family is different.
So how does legislation respond to that diversity?
The answer is not new. It is enabling good lives.
For over a decade, disabled people and their whānau have called for EGL and have
demonstrated that it works in practice.
It has been reinforced by independent reviews.
The Royal Commission into Abuse in Care called on the government to prioritize and
invest in the EGL approach. The New Zealand Disability
Strategy recognizes EGL as a core structural foundation
alongside the UNCRPD and Te Tiriti o Waitanga.
Yet despite this clear direction and evidence, the bill does not reflect or
advance these commitments, and in several areas, appears to move away
from them. This bill sets the foundation for disability support
services. Foundations matter because they shape everything that
follows. The United Nations Convention recognizes disabled
people as equal citizens and right holders.
Disability support is not simply a contribution towards care.
It is one of the ways the state enables disabled people to
exercise their rights on an equal basis with others.
Citizenship rights should never depend on the capacity of
parents, family, or whānau to realize them.
We are concerned that this bill shifts greater responsibility onto
families, including future generations of siblings, without
sufficient safeguards. Families provide extraordinary support out of a
love and commitment. That contribution is valuable.
But it should never be assumed or legislated as a
substitute for disability support.
We also want to raise a significant concern about the secondary legislation in this
bill. It shifts key decisions about disability supports and rights out of
primary law, reducing transparency, weakening
co-design, and has the potential to erode trust and weaken
safeguards out of proper democratic oversight.
The State of Caring report tells us that carers are already under significant
financial, physical, and emotional pressure.
And while the Data to Dignity report shows that people with Down Syndrome
continue to experience profound inequities across health,
education, employment, and income.
Families need partnership, not greater expectation.
Disabled people need rights, not uncertainty.
The committee asks three questions. What changes do we want?
We ask that the bill be stopped or significantly amended through genuine
co-design. It must explicitly embed the
UNCRPD, the Te Tiriti o Waitanga,
and EGL, and strengthen rights safeguards and accountability in prime
legislation and amend Clause 8. What is our biggest
concern? Our greatest concern is without these changes,
this bill risks moving away from a rights-based disability
support system and increasing reliance on families in ways
that undermine choice, control, self-determination, and
more importantly, equal citizenship.
Finally, what is the solution? We do not need a new vision or framework.
We already have EGL.
Please take time to get this right.
Work in genuine partnership with the disability community.
Build this bill on the foundations we already know work so
disabled people can live as valued and contributing citizens,
families are genuine partners, and future generations inherit a
disability support system that upholds rights,
dignity, and choice. Thank you.
Thank you very much. I just have one quick
question for you, if I might. I note your comments about secondary
legislation and that it
runs the risk of eroding trust and accountability
when it's set. But I wonder if, and I'm interested in your view,
if the secondary legislation or the regulations around it are
done in conjunction with or co-designed, if you like,
with the disability community and with full consultation and
engagement and reflect a good set of
regulations as a secondary
process,
would that
help? Because my point is that secondary legislation is
easier to review and update and carry through if things aren't
right rather than primary legislation. So just interested in what you think.
I think the first thing is if we don't know what it is.
All of us have signed legal documents before.
We want to see everything we need to see before we sign it, and we are expected to
sign a bill and agree to it when we don't see.
But secondary legislation, if there's true co-design, yes, it has a place,
but this bill is not showing what that is, and so it's looking at a
place where there could be real harm, and we need to ensure that that
does not happen.
Okay. Yep. Understood. Thank you very much.
That's very clear. Look, I think you've made a great submission.
Thank you for your
time. Your community should be very proud of your representation today.
Thank you.
Yeah.
All right.
Arthritis New Zealand is our next submitter.
They are online. Francesca, is that correct?
Yes.
Yes?
Yes. Yes.
Welcome to the committee. We are ready for you to go ahead.
I'll just turn on the dreaded clock, and you use your time as you
see fit.
Okay. Right. Good afternoon. Thank you for this opportunity.
My name's Francesca Holloway. I'm the advocacy manager at Arthritis New
Zealand, but I wear several hats, and one of my hats is as a
carer for a disabled family member, and the other is as a
parent of a disabled child. So I do bring lived
experience to the table, very much so.
Now, I'm assuming that you have read our brief submission and
recommendations, and we would agree generally about
time frames, and particularly important is the principle of
enabling the principles of enabling good lives
to be really recognized. We're really sad to see
that what is being greeted as a landmark in terms of making
progress for people with disabilities is not being
recognized in this. But most of what we want to talk
about is people with arthritis.
There are
over 860,000 people who live with arthritis.
Estimates were that there would be a million people by 2040,
but now it looks as though there will be more than a million people by
2040. So we are looking at a community of
a number of people who are going to be needing care in the future.
And we are actually turning our attention more and more
to looking at the caring situation as it
is
currently and as it may be, and we're looking at conducting
research in 2027, uh, to look at the experience of people
with arthritis.
Mm-hmm.
And we're aware the Synergia report on the State of Caring is due
out shortly, and we look forward to engaging actively on that
too. Now, our oral submission is going to focus
very much on why government support should not be described as making a
contribution and families seen as the
primary caregivers and supporters
This sentiment is at odds with the draft Care Strategy Action
Plan that we were involved with in discussing
and formulating, and made submission on it.
And this plan was focusing very much on
looking at the wellbeing of carers, and we do not see that
coming forth in this legislation.
It is at odds with the reality of the escalating disability and
extra caring that is required, and challenges the capacity of
families, as people with
arthritis often need very specialized care,
and they need people who are experienced in managing people
who have arthritis. Because arthritis is not just a few twinges in
old age. It affects all age groups, including children,
and it affects all ethnicities.
The
other thing that it is at odds with badly is
recognizing the reality of pressures on families.
Geography, the patterns of work, financial
pressures, the capacity of the family to care for somebody, are
all not considered in saying family are the natural
support and carers of people. And we believe
very strongly this needs to be reworded.
We would ask the committee to be considering the rewarding.
The rewording, sorry.
And would finish by saying families need carer
support, not as a, "Oh,
we'll make a contribution, but it's up to you." They
need support that is a true partnership, and we would
plead for partnership on this, for constructing something
that can work for all of us.
That said, we are aware that as our role as a
NGO, we want to be
forwarding what can happen and what can be done to improve the
situation. And now I'm going to try and be really tricky and hand over to
Philip Kearney, who I believe is online, too.
Philip?
Yes, I think so. We're just getting Philip-
Right
... into the right place.
Okay. Great. Philip, your camera's off, I think.
All right.
There he is.
Yeah, that is a bit of technology. Fantastic to the fact that
Francesca's in Auckland and I'm in Wellington.
Look, thank you for the opportunity of submitting to this bill.
And what Francesca has said is very much around that family and the understanding
of where they fit, and not the expectation.
I suppose what we've tried to also look at is how do we become quite solutions
focused. And we have been working with Heart Foundation,
Diabetes New Zealand, and Stroke Foundation to clearly work
about how do we increase the ability and knowledge of long-term
conditions within the community.
So these carers and people like that actually have got
greater capacity and understanding, and can therefore
provide an amazing service within the sector themselves.
So I know I only have about 30 seconds, so that's
really just something. I suppose what we're looking for is how do we provide the
solutions, or how do we support the solutions.
But certainly this bill needs some rethinking before we can do that.
Thank you very much. You did very well in your 34 seconds or whatever it
was.
Thank you both very much. Sadly, we're out of time.
But we do appreciate your submission and for taking the time to speak with
us.
Thank you.
Yeah.
All right.
Arts Access Aotearoa.
Okay.
Mm. Mm.
Don't work the clock.
Kia ora.
Thank you for joining us.
Who do we have with us?
Kia ora. I'm Stace Robertson, lead accessibility advisor
Kia ora.
I'm Neil
Wallace, kaiwhakahaere o Pūtanga Toi ki
Aotearoa.
Ah, kia ora. Both. All right. We have five minutes with you.
Please use that time as you wish, and
yeah, look forward to hearing from you.
Awesome. Thank you for the opportunity to speak.
Firstly, I want to acknowledge all the other deaf and disabled people who have
presented to the committee,
and those who will be impacted by this bill if it proceeds.
Your value is inherent in spite of what this bill says.
Our written submission speaks to our recommendations in more detail,
so we'd like to use this opportunity to speak more broadly to the barriers this
bill would create
from our perspective as an arts accessibility
advisory organization. So
in my role, I support deaf and disabled artists to,
and I advise on and support policy and systems change in the
arts sector to create greater equity and access for deaf and
disabled people as artists, audiences, and arts workers.
And I recommend that this bill does not proceed in its current
form. Disabled people exist in all our communities and
aspects of society.
Some of us are born with our impairments.
Others become disabled through accidents or injury.
Anyone can become disabled. We are all either disabled people
or not yet disabled people. But this bill sees disabled people
as separate to everyone else, as other, as a burden.
This bill views disabled people as a one-dimensional
stereotype based off of outdated and incorrect thinking.
It is the same view that enabled institutionalization of thousands of deaf and
disabled people, and is entrenched in decades of deficit
thinking and ableism
This ableist stereotype tries to reduce us into passive recipients of
support who do not contribute to society.
But this is wrong. Disabled people are employers, workers,
teachers, artists, students.
We
are
parents and carers ourselves. We contribute immensely to our families,
whānau, and wider society,
especially when we are supported by flexible, trust-based support
that values our potential and our inherent human right to
participate in society on an equal basis with others.
Arts Access Aotearoa's mandate is access and equity in the arts.
We know that the arts are a powerful voice for many disabled people.
It is our view that this bill will impact disabled people's right to creative
expression, access to culture, and the significant well-being
benefits of engaging in the arts, because forcing disabled
people to rely on natural supports makes them dependent on the
availability and resource of others rather than enabling them to
schedule supports around their own needs, employment, and interests.
This will remove them from employment opportunities and communities,
in turn impact negatively on all people who will miss out on the
stories, contributions, perspectives, and arts of deaf and disabled people.
I am fortunate to work with deaf and disabled artists who are making
groundbreaking, life-changing work from a position of disability and
deaf culture.
These artists are making work about their culture, growing up in
institutions, and the worlds and futures they imagine for themselves,
if only the systems they are forced to exist in could recognize them as well.
Disability support services has the potential to make those futures a reality,
enabling pathways into creative practice, education and
employment, and world-leading arts practice, but only if this bill is
reimagined too.
Arts Access Aotearoa urges you to undertake thorough consultation with deaf and
disabled people, DPOs and whānau to create DSS
legislation that upholds the rights of deaf and disabled people, honors Te
Tiriti o Waitangi,
and enables deaf and disabled people to live equitable lives where we are
empowered to contribute to Aotearoa's cultural and societal fabric.
We've closed the physical institutions, but we need to ensure that they don't live
on in our systems, structures, policy, and attitudes. Thank you.
Very good. Thank you very much. Did you have anything you wanted to add?
No?
Sure.
Okay. Very good.
Questions, anyone?
Well, maybe just a quick comment.
What has come up with a lot of the submissions is how this is a
deviation.
But actually, what the minister set out to do is to
codify existing practice because there has been nothing
that has been the legislative foundation for
operations and decision-making.
And it's relied,
over time, over many decades,
on some rough
cabinet minutes and letters between CEOs and ministers.
That's not the right way to do business, especially with such a
huge funding pool that's been made available.
So the minister set out to set the foundation, and then on
top of that,
and consult fully with the disabled community
on the secondary legislation, which has a lot more flexibility in
it for change.
So just to reassure you that there is a need to
have that foundational legislation in place so that
the almost $2 billion of extra funding can then be
managed, and DSS has been charged with coming up with a
system for how that's distributed.
Thank you.
But we will definitely take your comments into account-
Thank you
... as a committee. So thank you very much for being here today.
Of course.
It's nice to see you.
Okay, our next submitter.
I'm really bad at whole timing thing, so far behind.
Business and Professional Women New Zealand on the Zoom.
Teresa Mee.
I think there's Teresa. Nice to see you, Teresa.
Please
carry on. We do have your submission in front of us, so
you can use your five minutes as you see fit.
Thank you. Tena koutou katoa.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
My name is Teresa Mee, and I'm speaking on behalf of Business and
Professional Women New Zealand.
BPW New Zealand supports the rights, dignity,
independence, and full participation of disabled people in
our communities.
We also advocate for gender equity, and we recognize the vital role
that carers play in supporting disabled people every day.
So the committee has asked submitters to address three questions, and I'm going to
structure my presentation around those three questions.
So firstly, what changes do we want to see to the bill?
The main change we'd like to see is a stronger commitment to disability
support as a rights-based responsibility rather than a
budget-driven responsibility. We're concerned that the bill
places significant emphasis on limited funding
and on support being provided by families, whānau, and
communities.
While we understand the need for financial sustainability,
disability support should not increasingly rely on families
when services are reduced or unavailable.
We'd like stronger protections to ensure disabled people continue to
receive the support they need to live independently and to
participate fully in society.
We would also like greater transparency and accountability.
Decisions that affect disabled people's lives should be subject to proper
oversight and should not be easily changed without public
consultation and parliamentary scrutiny.
Finally, disabled people and disability organizations
should be genuinely involved in shaping future changes through meaningful
consultation and co-design.
So, the second question was: what is our biggest concern?
And this is that the bill appears to shift responsibility from the
government onto families,
and that women will carry much of that burden.
When support services are reduced, someone has to step in to provide
that care, and in many cases, that person is a mother, a
daughter, a partner, or another female family member.
Women already perform most of the unpaid caring work in
Aotearoa New Zealand.
If families are expected to do more, many women may have to
reduce their working hours, leave employment, or compromise
their own financial security.
At the same time, disabled people themselves may lose some of their
independence if they become increasingly reliant on family
members rather than receiving the support they need.
We're also concerned that the focus on managing costs
overlooks the hidden costs of unpaid care, like
lost workforce participation, caregiver burnout, and reduced
independence.
A system isn't truly sustainable if the costs are simply
shifted from government budgets onto families.
So finally, what would our solution be?
Well, that's simple. Slow down, consult properly, put
disabled people at the center of the process.
We'd like to see meaningful consultation with disabled people,
with carers, with families, with representative
organizations before significant changes are made.
And we believe the government should undertake a full assessment of the impact
this bill could have on disabled people, carers,
and particularly women who provide unpaid care.
Most importantly, disability support should remain grounded in
human rights principles.
Disabled people are not a cost to be managed.
They are citizens with the same rights as everyone else to
dignity,
independence, inclusion, and opportunity.
In closing, BPW New Zealand asks the committee to ensure
this legislation strengthens support for disabled people
rather than weakening it.
A fair society supports disabled people to live
independently
and participate fully in their communities, while also
recognizing and supporting the families and carers who stand
alongside them.
This must be guided by the principle of nothing about us
without us,
ensuring disabled people have a meaningful voice in the
decisions that affect their lives.
Thank you for your time. Do you have any questions?
Thank you. No, I don't think we do have any questions.
I think it was pretty clear. And we have got your recommendations in front of
us, which we will carry through to the next stage.
So, appreciate very much you taking the time to present the
BPW case. It's a great organization. Thank you very much.
Thank you so much.
Thank you.
All right. Next is the Christchurch Youth Council Incorporated.
No?
We just haven't
got it yet.
Okay.
Well, that's a shame. All right.
The Complex Chronic Illness Support on Zoom.
Kia ora. How are you?
Kia ora. Hi. Tena koutou katoa.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear for you today.
My name is Merinda Whitfield, and I'm the Chief Executive of Complex Chronic
Illness Support, also known as CCI Support.
We support almost 1,000 New Zealanders living with myalgic
encephalomyelitis, or chronic fatigue syndrome, long COVID,
fibromyalgia, and some dysautonomias.
They are often invisible, fluctuating, and life-changing conditions.
Some of the people we support are able to work part-time or participate in their
communities, while others are completely housebound or bedbound and
rely on others for their most basic daily needs.
In New Zealand, there's an increased prevalence for the conditions we support,
and approximately 1 in 30 people in New Zealand live with them to varying
functionality. Today, I'd like to focus on the three questions that the
committee has asked of us. Firstly, what we would like to see.
The most important changes is to make clear that
in the legislation is that family and natural
supports are there to complement funded disability supports, not
replace them. We would also like to see the bill to explicitly
recognize invisible and fluctuating disabilities, ensuring
eligibility is based on functional impact rather than whether a disability
is visible. Strengthening protections so that
the major changes to eligibility or entitlements cannot be
made without meaningful consultation and co-design, and
embed the principles of the UN Convention of the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities in enabling good lives.
Some of our biggest concerns is that the bill could
unintentionally shift more responsibility onto
family members without providing the protection they need.
We made a submission for the Carers Strategy, which was to
protect carers. This bill does not align very well
with that bill
Many of our people we support already rely on partners, aging parents,
adult children, or friends for intensive care.
These carers often reduce their work, experience financial hardship,
become socially isolated, and develop health problems themselves.
Families provide this care because they love the person, not because they have
unlimited capacity.
An illustration of what this looks like in practice, a young
adult studying at university became seriously unwell with long
COVID. They were assessed as eligible for disability support through NASC in
their region where they were studying.
As their condition deteriorated, they could no longer live independently, and they
returned home to be cared for by their family.
Following a prolonged three-month hospital admission, the family expected
appropriate disability support to continue.
Instead, they were effectively told because family members are available, the
responsibility for providing ongoing care now rested with them.
The relationships became strained.
The father was forced to make an impossible choice to leave his job to become a
full-time caregiver or be unable to meet his child's essential
care needs. Despite being an adult with significant
disability, the support available
changed simply because they had moved to a different region.
One that doesn't recognize ME/CFS or long COVID as a
disability and doesn't understand the severity of the issues facing
those adults with the disabling conditions we support.
As a consequence, it was devastating.
The family became overwhelmed, relationships became under
immense strain, and the young person experienced profound
distress and increasing risk to their well-being.
This is not an isolated story.
If the legislation creates the expectation that government-funded support
comes only after families have done everything they possibly can, we risk
pushing many carers beyond breaking point.
We also know that not everyone has family available.
Some people live completely alone.
Others have elderly parents who simply cannot provide care
indefinitely. We regularly support members whose primary carers
are parents in their 70s and 80s. These parents constantly
ask us, "What happens when I can no longer care for my child?"
The bill needs to give them the confidence that the system will be there when they
can't. Access to disability support
should never depend on whether someone happens to have family available to fill
the gaps.
So what are our solutions? We ask the committee to not pass the bill until
it's amended. Our solution is to strengthen the bill so that it
provides certainty and recognizes disability support as a
partnership. Government-funded services should work alongside
families, not against them.
Assessment processes should consider the sustainability of
caregiving and the well-being of the carers, not simply whether someone is
available. The bill should also clearly recognize conditions like
ME/CFS, long COVID, as legitimate causes of significant
disability with assessments based on a person's functional
capacity and ability to participate in everyday life.
And most importantly, the disabled people, carers, and organizations
representing them must continue to have a genuine voice and in
co-design for bills such as this before significant changes
are made in the future.
In
closing, I'd simply say the success of this legislation should not be
measured by how much unpaid carers can absorb.
It should be measured by whether disabled New Zealanders can live
with dignity, independence, choice, and security
while ensuring their families who stand beside them are supported rather than
stretched beyond their limits. Thank you for your time, and I welcome your
questions.
Thank you for your very good submission.
Sadly, we are over time, so we will not be able to
spend more time with you asking questions, which is such a shame.
But thank you for your submission.
It's greatly appreciated, and you did really well. So thanks.
Thank you.
All right.
Okay, we will now move to our next submitter.
Connexus Youth 2020 Trust?
No? Okay. Disabled People's Organizations
Coalition.
Disabled People's-
Six
... Organizations Coalition.
Okay.
I think Scott Boyle and-
And he's joining online.
Yeah.
Great. Oh.
The clock. I was thinking we were ending better with the clock.
Sorry, Chair. We didn't know if they were in person or not, so.
That's all right.
Okay. So we are looking for, do we have a name?
Who have we got?
Kera and Scott.
Kia ora both.
Nice to see you. We have five minutes for you to present your
submission, I think that's correct. Yes, it is.
So please use that time as you wish.
Fantastic. Thank you.
Tena koutou e te komiti. I'm Kera Sherwood-Reagan,
representing the DPO Coalition alongside my colleague Scott
Boyle. We will assume that our
written submission has been taken as read and also support the
submissions made by our fellow member
organizations.
Firstly, representing our disabled members around the
country, the DPO Coalition
meet with the government to ensure the collective voice of disabled people is
considered in decision-making, and we also have a role in
monitoring New Zealand's implementation of the UNCRPD, as is
required under Articles 4.3 and 33.3
This has included extensive consultation over the last two years on various
DSS matters, but not once were we made aware of
DSS legislation in progress.
We have repeatedly inquired to officials and to the minister
about the potential for disability-related legislative change,
including in the development of the New Zealand Disability Strategy, which
we note makes absolutely no mention of DSS legislative
reform.
We've also repeatedly raised concerns, including directly to the minister,
about the lack of meaningful engagement with disabled people and their
representative organizations, including the need to consult
early and provide adequate time for accessible consultation,
including the provision of alternate formats.
The complete lack of these fundamental engagement principles on the
DSS bill represents a fundamental breach of the
UNCRPD.
Disabled people have deep expertise on these matters, and our
engagement is not a suggestion, it is a legal requirement.
We are not, as the minister recently implied, worried for no
reason or basing our concerns on misinformation.
Rather, we are rightly concerned based on decades of both lived
experience and deep subject matter expertise.
If this expertise had been valued enough to engage with the DPOs earlier,
perhaps it would've been surfaced that the CRPD committee itself
already advised in its 2014 concluding observations to
New Zealand that a very similar piece of legislation was in
breach of the convention. The DPR
Coalition recognize that there is a need for a legislative
framework for DSS. However, we oppose the
Disability Support Services bill before us, and we urge that it be
withdrawn.
We consider it to be in breach of the UNCRPD,
particularly Article 4,
which includes
a requirement on government to work with disabled people.
Article 13, access to justice. 19, living
independently and being included in the community.
28, adequate standard of living and social
protection. A bill that breaches disability
rights, that entrenches ableist framing of disabled
people, that even undermines our Supreme Court, can never be
considered a suitable foundation for disability support in this
country. There is no meaningful recognition of the
UNCRPD in this bill. There is no commitment to enabling good
lives, and no meaningful foundation built on Te Tiriti
or Waitangi. This bill has such a flawed basis that we do
not believe it can be amended or that flaws can be resolved in secondary
legislation as seems to have been suggested.
New legislation needs to be developed from scratch in co-design with
disabled people, including our representative organizations,
again, as required by the CRPD.
Rights should not depend on who happens to occupy a ministerial
office at a given point in time. Government should protect those rights
in the primary legislation and not leave them vulnerable to future
political decisions. So on that note, I will hand over to my colleague,
Scott.
Thank you, Kira.
This bill asks disabled people to carry more risk.
It asks us to carry the risk that our families will always be
available, ever sacrificing. Clause 8 tells
disabled Kiwis that families should be responsible in the first
instance before government support is provided.
For some people, that may sound reasonable.
For us, it changes everything.
It means your support may no longer be determined by your needs.
It may instead be influenced by whether you have parents willing to keep
caring into old age, whether your partner is prepared to
sacrifice their own career and wellbeing, whether your
siblings can take on responsibilities that belong to the
state. Families are invaluable, but they
cannot become the government's contingency plan.
Support should never depend on who happens to love you enough
to give up their own future. It should depend on assessed need,
human dignity, and equal citizenship.
We are not an afterthought to public policy.
We are rights holders, citizens, taxpayers,
workers, volunteers, parents, carers,
researchers, artists, community leaders, and elected
representatives. We contribute to this country every single day.
The laws that govern our lives should never be written without
us.
The disability community is not asking for special treatment.
We are asking for certainty, for partnership, for
legislation that protects our rights rather than making them
conditional.
The question before this committee is not whether DSS should be
legislated. It should. The question is whether
Parliament will pass legislation that leaves disabled
Kiwis with fewer protections than they have today.
History will remember this bill.
It can be remembered as the legislation that strengthened our rights,
or it can be remembered as the legislation that weakens them.
This bill asks disabled people to carry the risk that the
rights we have fought for over generations can be
surrendered to the whims and wishes of whoever is in power.
We ask you to choose rights over discretion, partnership
over paternalism, independence over dependency,
and democracy over expediency. It is time to withdraw
this bill and return to the table with our community.
Take the time to build the legislative framework that we have been asking for,
one grounded in human rights, certainty, accountability, and
genuine partnership. Don't force us to settle for
legislation that asks us to trust in the promise of tomorrow
while diminishing our rights today.
Because legislation built with us will always be stronger
than legislation imposed upon us.
Nothing about us without us. Thank you.
Thank you very much. Look, I'm sorry, we don't have time for questions.
We are well over the time allocated.
So I do want to thank you both for appearing and for bringing your
well-thought-out submission to us.
We have heard your concerns loud and clear. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Thank you.
And might I suggest extending the time for others, given that you are working on
a kaupapa for disabled people, five minutes is very challenging
for many disabled people. A big mahi to you all.
Thanks for listening.
Thanks.
Thank you. We will move to our next submitters now.
E2 via Zoom.
Not online? All right. Epilepsy Waikato
Charitable Trust.
That
was them.
This one didn't come.
Oh, this one. Yeah, okay.
This one. That was them there.
And then E2 is not here, so we... Oh, Kia ora.
I'm sorry. I was busy chatting away here.
Epilepsy Waikato Charitable Trust,
kia ora, nice to have you with us. You have five minutes.
I will set that clock going when I work out the technology.
So,
over to you.
Awesome. Thank you. Tena koutou katoa, and thank you for the opportunity to
speak. My name is Esther Little. I am the epilepsy advisor for
Epilepsy Waikato Charitable Trust.
Next to me is our co-chair, Tracey Morgan.
Epilepsy is one of Aotearoa's most common long-term neurological
disabilities, yet it remains largely invisible in disability
policy, data, and frameworks. Our work is grounded in Te
Tiriti o Waitangi, the UNCRPD, and the Enabling Good
Lives principles, alongside a number of other disability strategies
and plans.
I want to speak clearly today. This bill, as drafted, is
unsafe. It removes rights, increases inequity,
and places disabled people and their families at real risk of harm.
I'll speak directly to the three questions the committee has asked submitters to
address.
What changes do we want to see?
EWCT asks the committee to reject the bill in its current form
and require government to start again and co-design a new
legislative framework with disabled people, tangata whaikaha Maori,
whanau hau, carers, providers, and representative
organizations from the beginning.
Eight national disability organizations have publicly stated that
the select committee process breaches UNCRPD
obligations and has denied disabled people, families,
carers, and providers a meaningful say on legislation that
shapes their lives.
We ask you to remove Clause 8, remove Clauses
11, 3, F, and G,
remove Clauses 12 to 15 and Schedule 1 provisions,
embed Te Tiriti, UNCRPD, and EGL principles
explicitly in the legislation,
ensure all substantive
eligibility and rights protections sit in primary legislation, not
ministerial programs,
guarantee fair employment protections for family carers, establish
an independent, accessible appeals and complaints mechanism before any new
system takes effect. These changes are essential to protect disabled
people's rights, safety, and independence.
What is our biggest concern? Our biggest concern is that the bill shifts
disability support from a rights-based relational system based on
need to a rationed and capped, discretionary, fiscally driven one
with profound consequences for people with epilepsy.
This bill is also not trauma-informed.
It creates systemic uncertainty, removes safety, and
undermines autonomy, choice, and control,
all of which are essential for disabled people and their whanau.
Many disabled people are already living at the edge of crisis due to
untreated pain, constant dismissal or delay, worsening mental
health, and instability. This bill would push some people over
the edge or over that edge.
Two clauses, 8 and 11, are especially dangerous and have been well covered by
previous submitters. We support those concerns.
What we want to add is the epilepsy-specific clinical risk,
which the committee has not yet heard in depth.
To illustrate the risk, imagine a young adult with epilepsy who has
unpredictable nocturnal seizures.
Their mum stays awake most nights listening for signs of distress because
missing a seizure could mean injury or hospitalization.
Under Clause 8, she would be expected to exhaust all
support before receiving help.
Under Clause 11, her son could lose support if she earns slightly
more one week.
Under ministerial programs, their funded hours could change
overnight and with no consultation.
This whanau is already exhausted, already stretched, already doing
everything right, and this bill would make their situation even more
unsafe. The World Health Organization's Epilepsy: A
Public Health Imperative report emphasizes that epilepsy requires
immediate support and continuous monitoring.
Any delay or reduction in support increases the risk of injury,
hospitalization, and preventable harm.
This bill ignores that reality.
For a condition like epilepsy, where needs can escalate within minutes, a system
based on ministerial discretion rather than stable rights is
dangerous, and loss of flexibility would undermine safety
and independence.
Disabled people have repeatedly been asked to trust government,
and history shows that trust alone is not enough.
Rights must be embedded in primary legislation, not left to ministerial
discretion.
The minister has said this bill doesn't change anything, but that is not
accurate. It lays the legal groundwork for major future changes,
including means testing and redefining eligibility without
safeguards or consultation.
What is our solution? Our solution is simple and constructive.
Reject the bill and start again with genuine co-design with disabled people.
Embed rights, not rationing. Remove harmful
clauses and rebuild the framework.
Create an independent appeals and oversight mechanism.
A modern disability support system must uphold Te Tiriti,
uphold UNCRPD, guarantee independent living and real
choice and control, protect family carers as essential labor,
provide stable, enforceable rights, and ensure decisions are
transparent, reviewable, and grounded in need, not fiscal
pressure. This bill does not strengthen disability support.
It weakens it. It does not stabilize the system.
It destabilizes disabled people's lives.
It does not uphold rights. It removes them.
It does not honor Te Tiriti. It ignores it.
It does not support families. It burdens them.
For people with epilepsy, the consequences are not theoretical.
They are injuries, hospitalizations, and preventable deaths.
We urge the committee to reject this bill and require government to work in
genuine partnership with disabled people, tangata whaikaha Maori,
whanau au, carers, and the organizations that support them.
Disabled people are important members of society.
They deserve respect, safety, independence, and support to live
good lives. Strong disability support strengthen families and
communities. Weak disability supports place families into crisis.
Nga mihi nui.
Thank you.
Thank you very much for your submission. Sadly, we don't have time for questions.
But I do
want to just say you have written a very substantial submission,
and your recommendations are clear. So thank you for presenting it.
Thank you for your time.
Thanks.
Committee, we are going to move to a short break.
I think you probably need to stand up and
just move slightly. We will be back.
Do we have submitters in the room who are waiting to submit next?
No?
Okay.
All right. We'll be back at
5 to 2, 5 to 6?
Yes, ma'am.
Yep.
Just for a quick break. Thank you.
Back on. We'll set off that dreaded clock.
But we have got your submission in front of us. But over to you.
Oh, kia ora koutou. I'm Tony Paine. I'm the chairperson of Silver Noodle Soup.
I'm also the dad of 30-year-old Maggie-Rose, who's got physical and
intellectual disabilities, and my colleague can introduce himself.
Okay.
Kia ora. My name is Nicholas Johnson.
I'm an actor with Silver Noodle Soup and a board member.
I'm here to support people's lives in the disability community.
Awesome.
Fantastic.
So we're a film and theater company whose actors are all people with intellectual
disability or neurodiversity. We receive no direct government funding,
but our contribution to film and theater making is only possible because of the
support the actors, who are all adults, get from each other, their families, and
from the government. We
would argue a sort of small but pretty groovy example of what's possible when
public funding is seen as an essential part of ensuring disabled people get to do
the things and enjoy the human rights that most non-disabled people take for
granted.
Our critique of this bill is that it will erode that essential support
that we and so many other people rely on and will make disabled people's lives,
and the lives of those who care for them, significantly worse.
We're saying that for two reasons,
which I suspect you've heard before, but I will say again.
We are saying that because of the way this bill was produced.
We say to the government, look, if you want to raise the question about whether
disabled adults have a right to government support regardless of their family's
ability to support them, then raise the question.
It's a fundamental and significant issue that impacts deeply on the lives of
hundreds and thousands of citizens. Let's have the debate.
But for the government to have considered the question behind closed doors without
any reference to the people most affected by this bill is frankly outrageous.
If this bill goes back to the House without any significant changes, you will be
saying to disabled people and their communities and families and organizations
that our point of view doesn't really matter.
You'll be saying that our involvement in profound decisions about our own lives is
not really required. You will be saying that our lives are not as
important or as worthy as consideration of other factors, including,
no doubt, your calculus of cost and affordability.
Disabled people and their families have heard these damaging messages in
countless ways, countless times. Please do not add to that burden.
The second reason that we say this bill will make disabled people's lives worse is
how it redefines government's disability support as a last
resort. The bill asserts that families and communities should do the
heavy lifting, and the government will only step in when that doesn't work, and
that's a bleak and cynical assertion. It's also patronizing.
Families and organizations like Silver Noodle are already doing all we can.
We do this for the same loving reasons that families and communities look after
each other across the board, but also because we know that if we don't do it,
nobody else will. And we're not just caring for our loved ones.
We're fighting the good fight. We're fighting with institutions who want to exclude
us,
working part-time or not at all because of the time we need to roster a team of
support workers or find an acceptable living situation for our adult
kids as we get older. We're fighting the discrimination that disabled people face
every day, and we all rely on disability support
services and the funding we currently get to make going those extra miles
passably possible. So any erosion of that support
imperils our ability to do the caring and empowering that the architects
of this bill seem to think we're not doing enough of.
The message of this bill is clear. You want families and communities to do more and
government to do less. That's a moral and human rights failure that will
ultimately diminish the lives of disabled people.
Ironically, it's also likely to be a fiscal failure, as it will drive more
families to seek institutional solutions as carers age.
So we say to you this bill needs significant change.
Actually, we say you should throw it out and start again and get that process
right. But at the very least, make sure the bill enshrines disability
support services as a fundamental human right,
not as a last resort that can be further eroded by
ministerial introduction of means testing.
Please make sure the bill clearly defines the support the state will
provide regardless of people's income, and make sure there are clear
safeguards in place, including parliamentary approval of major changes.
And finally, to repeat my first point, if you want to dismantle yet
another part of the social contract, if you want to make the case that
disability support is not a fundamental human right, then at least have the courage
to do so in the context of a public debate and with deep engagement with disabled
people, their carers, and the organizations that suit them. Thank you.
Thank you very much.
30 seconds to go.
I've got a question.
Um, Maureen.
Well, it's actually a comment. Thank you so much for coming and speaking
to the committee. Um, you too, Nicholas.
Um,
this bill doesn't set out to,
um, plan for the future and, you know, some of those things that you were saying.
It sets out to codify existing practice.
So the changes that are being put about in the background will
be secondary legislation. The minister has given an absolute
assurance that that will be done in consultation.
But at the moment, there is no legislation that guides disability services,
and so this is existing practice. Um, oh, and I'll pick up the
point on the families. Um, at the moment, there is
already an assessment that is done.
It's not saying that families must, but it's recognizing
that families, um, in the bill it says, "Have
responsibility in the first instance for the well-being
of their family members." So they're the ones that
have the
utmost responsibility for helping with decision-making.
It's not saying that they must be the, um, caregivers
of first port of call. So I just want to give you
that reassurance, um, that the next phase is
actually all of the things that you spoke about.
Um, can I-- I know it's not a question, but can I-
Through the chair. I don't know.
Well, yep. Be quick.
Be quick.
Look, um, you'll forgive me. I'm trying not to be unparliamentary.
I'm not sure that we trust you
when you say that.
That's my question.
Yeah.
Um, because
this, the process to-- Even if you-- If-- I don't-- And I'm not even sure that I
can see the codification of existing practice in this bill.
Um,
I see the door being opened for things like means testing.
I see the door being opened for, um...
And the, the process you've used to date, um, hasn't
given any meaning or manner to disabled people.
So why would we trust you that you'll do it next time around?
Yeah.
So I'm just... I'm sorry. I just need to-
No, no.
No, it's fine.
Make that point.
I can say there's been 18 months of DSS to get
to this bill.
But not on the bill.
To get to this bill. But thanks for your comments.
Yeah, but with who-- But who was on the road?
Well, that's my point.
Oh, sorry.
Okay. I think we have to leave it there.
Okay.
But your point is well made, Leah.
Thank you.
From the unforgettable silver noodle soup film-
Yeah.
... company. I'll never forget the name. Um, it's fantastic.
We'll send you tickets.
And your, um, your submission was good. Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you, Nicholas, for coming.
All right. Where are we going now, team?
I think the Hearth Trust.
All right. The Hearth Trust is on Zoom. Elliot.
Oh.
This is going to be difficult finding this.
Yeah, see-
Jumping everywhere.
The Hearth. Are you there? Can you hear us, Elliot?
Given up the ghost.
Uh, hello?
Hello.
Hello. I can hear you fine.
I can hear you. There you are. Now we can see you. Hi, um, Elliot.
I'm Dana. I'm the chair of the committee.
Um, you have five minutes, uh, with us.
We look forward to hearing from you.
We have your submission,
um, in front of us. Well, some of us, if we've managed to find it because we've
rearranged it. So thank you for being so accommodating.
Um, I'll leave it up to you to carry on.
Great. Thanks very much. Okay. So yeah, my name's Elliot Ashton-Stretch.
Um, I'm presenting today on behalf of my workplace, Hearth Trust.
Um, we support three men with intellectual disabilities, Tim,
Corey, and Andy, um, or just the guys.
Um, the guys have parents who also freely give support every week over and above
the DSS-funded support, just according to their capacity and what's in
the best interest of their child.
Um, as stated in our written submission, we are quite concerned with this
bill, um, in particular clause 8, which states that before
DSS services are provided, a disabled person must refer
to an extremely broad definition of family and
community resources, if such resources exist, uh, with the
ministry or a contracted provider ultimately, uh, having the say in
what is considered reasonable resourcing.
Um, we think it'd be quite problematic for an external agency to assess a
family's capacity to resource support.
For someone outside of the situation, it's also difficult to understand the impact
that dictating support would have on the disabled person and
their family members and wider support network.
Um, our experience is that family support is given freely and from love
with a deep understanding of capacity for support and what part it may play in
enabling their sons or daughters to live a dignified life.
Uh, it's based on a firm bedrock of DSS-funded support services being
provided as a right in the first instance.
We strongly believe the current model of individualized funding where
families and whānau with disabilities have choices as to who provides care and
support is far better equipped to uphold their dignity and,
uh, their right to exercise agency and autonomy in their lives.
Um, we're also concerned with clause 11.
There are already existing, uh, asset and income testing aspects to WINS
benefits for people with disabilities.
For example, the accommodation benefit and supported living payment.
But we are worried that applying means testing, uh, and asset testing
to disability support services would further create a divide between the
opportunities of disabled and non-disabled people to make choices about how
they would like to live their lives and use their resources.
The need to use some of their money to fund basic support costs means that disabled
people's financial options, uh, in areas of their lives, um,
to achieve an everyday life are already more constrained than a
non-disabled peer with the same income or assets.
Um,
we're concerned about, um, what the last submitter referred to as well with, um,
the legal power for a future, a future minister to introduce secondary legislation
such as income and asset testing without, uh, due public scrutiny
or a parliamentary vote. Many people in our wider community already lack the
time and energy to engage with the submission process, and
removing the ability for people in the wider public space to have their say down
the line we are concerned is undemocratic.
I'm here today on behalf of my organization, but more so for those in my wider
community whose voices I know haven't and will not be heard in this process.
I wouldn't be surprised if you've heard the following recommendations many times
today, or the prior recommendations rather.
In its current form, this bill has the potential to dramatically reshape the
lives of people with disabilities and their whanau for many years to
come. Disabled people's lives have the
possibility of shrinking, and people may lose access to
fantastic support. And ultimately, whanau will stretch themselves even thinner
to fill the gaps.
Many families will find themselves perpetually under-resourced and
unable to provide good lives for some of the most vulnerable people in the country.
In principle, we are absolutely in support of establishing a clear legal
framework for disability support services, but we do not agree that this is the
right way to do it.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Yes, a question from Marama No Kapiki.
Thank you.
Kia ora, Elliot.
Elliot, where's your trust radar with this bill?
How trusting are you of it?
I've listened to your presentation, and thank you for that.
But just where's your trust barometer on this one?
Do
you mean in terms of what the last submitter said about not
necessarily
trusting the wording or the consultation and so on?
Yeah. Yes.
Yeah.
Yes. All of it.
Yeah. We're concerned on the heel of previous changes that have been
made without consultation
at very short notice that have had pretty impactful flow on effects for
some people in our community. I think it is
difficult to take it at its word.
Thank you.
Right. Okay.
I think that's all we have for you, Elliot.
Thank you very much.
Thanks very much.
And I wish you well, and thank you for all that you do and the work that you're
doing-
Kia ora
... for the people you help look after.
Kia ora. Thanks very much.
Kia ora. Thank you.
The next submitter is Jonty Carroll from
the Inclusive Greens Network.
Kia ora. Can you hear me okay?
Yeah. Hello, Jonty.
Hi.
I'm Dana. I'm the chair of the committee today, and we've got
five minutes with you. If you'd like to, the clock
will come up, and you should be able to see that.
But look, you just use your five minutes how
you want to.
Thank you.
So yes. My name is Jonty, and I'm speaking
on behalf of the Inclusive Greens network,
but also as myself. So yeah,
we represent disability wing of the Green
Party of Aotearoa, trying to
promote disability rights inside the party
and also outside. But we do have
independent views and
are speaking in opposition to this bill because we feel
it is wrong, not because of our party's position.
I am a disabled person, as are
everyone within Inclusive Greens.
I am autistic, have a speech impediment, as you might have
picked up on, and also have a chronic illness.
Like many of the previous submitters, we are strongly opposed to
this bill and would like to see it scrapped
and started entirely.
As disabled people, we are
used to being overused by this government and
previous governments, but that does not justify
it, and we think
that it is more of a surprise that carers
are also apparently being excluded from this
process.
As a disabled person, I know that carers
are an essential need to us and must
be looked after, and also face massive
disadvantages in the community.
We would not be here where we are without carers, and yet
disabled people themselves, carers are
overused.
Mm-hmm.
So
yes. As
we feel that this bill comes from a
place of saving money over the rights
of disabled people.
We see that
carers had to take this case to your Supreme Court,
where
it was found in your favor,
which has been overturned. We would ask your
government to look at whether it is of
an advantage to listen to both carers and
its workers. We would also like to see
an increase in support for caregivers
as many of you are struggling both professionally
and at home. And
therefore, we recommend this bill is scrapped.
Happy to take any questions.
Thank you very much
for your submission, Jonty.
I think we're pretty clear. Does anyone have any questions for Jonty?
No?
No, that's great. So thank you for presenting today.
Thanks.
And for coming and talking to us. It's been good to meet you.
Thank you.
And we will take everything that you've said into account as we work through the
different aspects of the bill.
Yeah.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Natalia is our next
submitter. She was over the page. Natalia Maamea?
I'm here.
Ah, there she is.
Kia ora, how are you?
I'm well, thank you.
Good. All right.
Natalia, we have five minutes, so you can use that
how you see fit. We'll ask some questions if there's time at the end.
Otherwise, you can follow up with your submission if you like.
Perfect.
Tenei te mihi ki a koutou. Thank you for the opportunity and making
arrangements to get me rescheduled in. I'll take my submission as read.
Ko Natalia Maamea toku ingoa. Nō te Moana-nui-a-Kiwa ahau.
I'm here today as a mama of four. Our youngest son is autistic.
My husband has been his full-time carer for the past 10 years.
I'm self-employed because that's what our family needs to make this work.
Families like mine don't usually ask to be seen.
We simply ask to be supported.
Sharing our story today isn't easy, but I felt a responsibility to speak
about this bill because it affects families like ours and many
others who don't have the capacity or the confidence to be here today.
So when our son was diagnosed just after his first birthday, our
entire lives changed. Not just me, not just my husband,
all six of us.
My husband stepped away from his career to care full time for our son, and I
became the main income earner.
Our three older children have grown up learning that frequently plans change.
Mum and dad's attention is divided, their little brother's needs often come first,
and they've had to learn how to navigate the world of autism to care for him.
We all care for him naturally, instinctively, free of
charge.
None of us resent that. That's just what families do.
Our son has never been the burden, though.
The burden is trying to navigate a system that too often forgets the
families and friends standing behind him.
And I need you to understand something.
Love and sacrifice are not unlimited resources.
Families don't have endless capacity to absorb more
responsibility simply because we love someone.
Yet that's the direction
that this is moving us towards.
What concerns me about the bill isn't only what it says today, it's the
direction that it sets. It places greater emphasis on family
responsibility first, while giving future governments broad
powers to change settings without the same level of parliamentary
scrutiny or public consultation.
For families like mine,
that creates major uncertainty. And after years of
self-sacrifice and commitment, it also feels deeply disrespectful
to leave the future of disability support open to change
without appropriate oversight and engagement.
But here's the thing. We've already rearranged our lives.
We've already made the sacrifices. We've already put family first.
So when the government describes disability support as a supplement
to care, I worry that it overlooks what families like mine
are already contributing first every single
day. Family first should never become family
alone.
Government shouldn't look at families already carrying heavy loads and
conclude they can simply carry more.
Instead, it should see families who are buckling under the weight of
responsibility and ask: How can we help?
This bill isn't simply about funding, though.
It's about what we believe disabled whānau are entitled to expect
from this country. I want my son
to grow up in Aotearoa that sees disability support as an investment
in him and families,
not a cost to be shifted to whānau.
The measure of this bill isn't whether it saves money.
It's whether disabled people and their whānau are left more
supported, more secure, more in control, and better
able to thrive. If not, it isn't achieving what disability
support exists to do.
Over the past week, you've heard from organizations and experts, carers, and
disabled people. Many of us have shared deeply personal
parts of our lives with you. We haven't done that because we enjoy
reliving our hardest moments.
We've done it because we believe that staying silent would have greater
consequences.
As one of your final submitters, mine is just one story of many, but I
hope you'll remember that every story you've heard represents a real family,
not a policy problem, not a budget line, but people.
Today, I simply ask that you remember the stories you've heard.
The siblings, the nannies. Remember the mums and dads that put
careers and dreams aside because someone they love needs them.
Please honor those stories by recommending that this bill not proceed, and instead,
work alongside disabled people, carers, whānau
to co-design legislation in good faith as the UNCRPD
requires.
It's grounded in Te Tiriti that genuinely strengthens manaakitanga
rather than shifting more of the load onto those already giving everything
they have.
And finally, please don't mistake our willingness to carry these
responsibilities for an ability to carry everything.
Kia kaha rā. Ngā mihi nui ki a koutou katoa.
Thank you so much. Very well said.
Yeah, we appreciate
your time. And thank you.
Thank you.
You've got one second. Maria Minog.
Natalia, one second. Tēnā koe. Natalia, do you or your husband
ever feel like you could step away from this role, the role that you carry,
the responsibility?
Absolutely not. Never ever. Ever. Whāia. Never.
Ka pai. Thank you.
Well done.
Thank you.
Look, I really want to thank you, and I acknowledge what you said
about some families not being- ...
feeling that they could represent themselves today, and that you
represent not only your own family, but many others too. So, thank you.
It's much appreciated.
Thank you.
Ngā mihi.
Kia ora. Okay.
Next up is Jessica Hammond from The Opportunity
Party.
It's the clock.
Me and the clock, we're not a thing.
Yeah.
Sorry, can you hear me now?
Yes. Hello, Jessica. We can hear you, and we can see you.
Wonderful.
You have five minutes with us. Please
carry on through your submission.
Kia ora. Thank you. At
Opportunity, we support a clear statutory foundation for disability support
services.
We acknowledge the Fleming decision created genuine urgency
around carer employment status. But that urgency doesn't
justify the process failures and the rights
erosions in this bill.
In particular, on the process failures, three weeks to submit on legislation of
this scale, it's not meaningful participation.
It's difficult enough for us, but it's a real barrier to the very people that the
bill affects the most. The government's own regulatory
impact statements discloses there was no community
consultation before the bill was introduced, citing the sensitivity of
proposals.
That sensitivity is precisely why you consult.
We're also concerned that a lot of what
matters, including the eligibility, the assessment
processes, funding allocation, they're not
provided for in the bill itself. There's just too much
of the detail that matters that's been deferred to secondary
legislation and ministerial discretion.
You've heard what some of the families affected by this bill
are dealing with, and they can't plan their lives around support
conditions that can change at the stroke of a pen.
We're also concerned about the treatment in the bill of natural supports.
It's concerningly vague. It's not clear how
much informal family care must be provided before funded
government support is triggered.
There's families who are already providing care at substantial personal cost.
They shouldn't face an undefined, potentially unlimited
obligation to fill gaps in formal support.
The Fleming decision was a hard one.
Recognition that parents providing intensive funded care deserve the employment
protections that every New Zealander expects.
We don't accept that the complexity
created by the Supreme Court's decision
can only be resolved by removing rights rather than
clarifying obligations.
If someone is providing 40 or more hours of funded care
per week, they're entitled to outcomes similar to people
who are in full-time employment.
So we urge the committee to
require genuine consultation
to bring the key settings into primary legislation,
to restore legal recourse for carers, and to provide
a clear statutory entitlement to fair employment
conditions to those providing intensive levels of
funded care.
Kia ora.
So are you saying that-- I just was noting that point you just made
there about the employment conditions. Would you just like to expand on that?
What do you mean by providing fairer employment
conditions?
Oh, the kinds of things that any of us would expect.
KiwiSaver or
the
kind of things that anyone in an employment situation would
expect. Fair pay,
for instance.
How would an
employment contract be managed?
Yes. Do you want to ask the question?
How would an employment contract be managed?
How would you suggest that's handled?
So we're not saying that it is exactly the same as an employment
relationship. We're saying that people
who are doing this sort of work for
more than 40 hours a week should expect
that kind of support.
Okay.
If I could just make a comment, that might be hard to-- You cannot be part employed
to get the benefits, but not employed for the other bits. It's tricky.
But anyway, I accept your point.
Okay, anyone else got anything they'd like to raise? No?
All right. Great. Thank you, Jessica.
All right.
Thank you for your time-
Thank you, Laura
... for presenting your
submission.
Kia ora.
Thank you.
And now we have
the NZ ME Society.
It says Angela on the form, but it is Fiona who will speak.
Oh, there she is. Look. Look at that.
Kia ora.
Let me just do the technical stuff.
You've got five minutes there, Fiona, and we have your submission in front of us,
so please go ahead.
Tena koutou katoa and ngā mihi. Thank you for the opportunity to speak.
So across Aotearoa, one in 30 people now live with
post-viral illness. That means in every classroom,
workplace, and boardroom, someone you once knew, someone who
was thriving, is now managing a debilitating
energy-limiting condition. Many have had to leave their jobs,
withdraw from study, or disappear from community life altogether.
These are the missing people, not because they chose to step back, but because our
systems were never designed for conditions where exertion
causes harm. So ko Fiona Charlton toku ingoa.
I am a lived experience president of ANSMYS, the national advisory
body for people with myalgic encephalomyelitis and
associated conditions. We represent all regional ME
and long COVID organizations across the Motu, including CCI
Support, who you heard from earlier.
This 1 in 30 equates to 185,000 New Zealanders.
Many are housebound or bed bound, and their lives depend on safe,
consistent disability support, which many do not receive.
Research shows people with ME have among the lowest physical
functionality, and in severe cases, functionality is
comparable to someone in the final weeks of terminal illness.
We ask for three core changes.
Explicit recognition of severe energy limiting and
fluctuating disability. Conditions like ME, where
exertion causes physiological harm, must be named
so assessors understand the real level of need.
Remove the presumption, as you've heard many times today, that family and whanau
are responsible for care. Care needs can be intensive and
unpredictable. Many people have no family available, and others
have whanau who are aging, unwell, or already stretched.
Family support must be voluntary and sustainable, not
assumed. Thirdly, put core protections in the primary
legislation. Appeals, safeguarding, complaints
pathways, and eligibility principles must not be left to
future programs or ministerial directions.
Disabled people need certainty and co-design now, not
later.
Our biggest concern with this bill as
drafted is that it embeds structural inequity.
People with ME currently experience significant under-servicing.
Only 1.6% of ME beneficiaries receive DSS.
There's extreme inconsistency across NASC regions, a
postcode lottery of care, with ME unrecognized for support
in some areas.
Assessments that do not recognize the severely debilitating
symptoms like exertion intolerance, cognitive impairment, or
sensory hypersensitivity.
Under support so severe it has led to life-threatening malnutrition
and even death in very severe cases.
We are also deeply concerned about means testing.
People with ME are low income because their disability
forces them out of work and because whanau are pushed into unpaid
care. Means testing creates a poverty trap and removes
support from those who need it most.
Our solution is a rights-based framework that
recognizes energy-limiting disability in the purpose clause,
removes the family responsibility presumption, embeds core
protections in the act, mandates national assessment standards and
ME-specific training. ANSMYS is an accredited education
provider ready to participate in workforce development.
The solution is to guarantee accessible processes for housebound people,
uphold Te Tiriti and UNCRPD obligations
through genuine partnership, including Section 53C, which
states ME should be included in disability services.
When we served on the Whai Kaha advisory panel reviewing DSS
eligibility criteria before it was disbanded,
it was clear that disability supports were required to fit within a predetermined
budget rather than the budget being built around actual need.
We urge the committee to consider the needs of the entire disability community, all
those who meet the government's own definition of disability, and ensure that
legislation, frameworks, and services are designed to match those
needs. In closing,
ANSMYS supports the goal of a clear, sustainable disability
support framework. But this bill, as drafted, risks narrowing
access and entrenching inequity for people with ME, long COVID, and other
energy-limited conditions. We urge the committee to pause the
bill, strengthen it, and co-design it with NGOs like ours and disabled
people, including those with energy-limiting conditions.
ANSMYS is ready to support that work.
DSS needs to stop being the ambulance at the bottom of the cliff after a
person has been severely incapacitated, and through this bill,
build the fence at the top. Give the most vulnerable the support they
desperately need.
Kia ora. Thank you.
Thank you very much for your submission.
And we are right on time, so we don't have time for
questions. I'm sorry, but-- Oh.
Just a very quick comment.
Oh, look, she's just relentless in her
desire to talk.
Well, no. Anyway, I just wanted to say
thank you so much for the suggested changes in wording that you
included in your submission. It's really helpful. Thanks.
Great. That's fine. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Fiona. It was very much appreciated.
Kia
ora.
Righty-o.
Team, we are just not quite there with the
last two submitters.
We might just take a five-minute break,
see if we can get them online, and then we'll be...
Anne's all good?
Sorry? Which one? On the back page. Kiri and Kira.
Fine, 'cause I got out the clock.
I'm
just messaging Barry.
Stop watch.
Timer.
Five minutes. Here we go.
Okay.
Gary's just joined the call.
Hello, Kerry.
Kia ora.
Oh, kia ora. Nice to have you with us.
I'm Dana, I'm the chair today for the subcommittee, and
we have got your submission in front of us. Thank you for joining us early.
I'm sorry, I hope that hasn't put you out too much.
We've just got you and one other left, and we thought if we could power through,
then that would be good.
You've got five minutes, so please use that as you see fit for your
submission.
Thank you.
Kia ora koutou. Ko Kerry toku ingoa.
Thank you for the opportunity to be heard by you today.
I take my submission as read. As incomplete as it was, I simply did not have enough
time. I hope you will consider what I was able to share there and what I have to
say now. As a disabled person, this bill is, quite frankly,
terrifying. A choice has been made to link Supreme Court judgment to the
creation of a new foundational legislative framework for DSS.
That's not the only path forward here, and it is sad that this government is
pitting disabled people against their whanau in a fight for recognition of
existing rights. That's not who we are.
We did not choose this, and it scares me.
A choice has been made to ignore obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi,
the UNCRPD, and exclude disabled people, tangata
whaikaha Maori, tangata saile maloo, deaf and turi
Maori, our whanau, our organizations, and our communities from
actively partnering in the development of this bill.
This is a breach of rights. This government knew that, and it did it anyway, and
that scares me. A choice was made knowingly to further
exclude our communities through this inaccessible and expedited select
committee process, and it scares me.
A choice was made to exclude specific Te Tiriti provision in this
bill, knowing that whanau haua, tangata whaikaha Maori, turi Maori and
whanau experience compounding negative impacts of poor policy and
systems, and that scares me.
A choice was made to exclude robust mechanisms for accountability
and for the safeguarding and rights protections of disabled people,
whanau and carers within primary legislation, despite the Prime
Minister's recent apology and promise of safety to survivors of the
truly horrific abuse that was inflicted on them in state and faith-based
care institutions, and that scares me.
A choice was made not to ensure that the DSS primary
legislation is a rights-based framework grounded in enabling good lives
approach and principles, and New Zealand's obligations under Te Tiriti o Waitangi,
the UNCRPD, the UNDRIP, Human Rights Act, and
the New Zealand BORA, and it scares me.
A choice was made to regressively reframe the role of DSS-funded
support as a contribution to care when access to support is a
right, and supports must enable full participation in ordinary life
outcomes, not merely contribute to care.
This signals a shift away from early access to person-centered,
individualized funding, and that scares me.
A choice has been made to not adequately recognize the unpaid labor
of family carers who have propped up this sector and all other
sectors that disability inevitably intersects with for decades.
The state seems content with perpetuating the multi-generational poverty and
hardship of disabled people and their whanau, and it scares me.
A choice has been made to provide expansive ministerial powers, leaving rights,
entitlements, policy settings, including eligibility and funding standards,
up to any future minister's whim. That is not transparent
decision-making or good law. It will not stabilize DSS.
It is undemocratic and sets a troubling precedent that all New Zealanders should be
concerned about, and it scares me.
Choices have been made to introduce this bill and to pass it through its first
reading without having done policy cost benefit analysis and without
detailing how associated risks will be managed, and it scares me.
A choice has been made to limit consultation with our communities to the scope of
controlled narratives and commenting on pre-planned programs without
providing context. This level of engagement is what this government is
calling consultation on stabilizing and strengthening of DSS
and recently announced carer support packages, despite having the proven
co-design frameworks that birthed the Whanau Ora in enabling good lives approaches
to guide this government. That is not partnership, and it scares me.
A choice has been made to exclude provisions for supported decision-making from
primary legislation, and it scares me.
A choice has been made not to establish an independent DSS commissioner
reporting to Parliament on compliance and the UNCRPD and enabling good
lives principles, and that scares me.
A choice has been made not to establish an independent right of appeal against
funding and eligibility decisions in primary legislation, and it scares
me. A choice has been made not to give effect to the recommendations made by
the Committee on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities in 2022, and it scares
me. A choice has been made to unnecessarily include
provisions for means testing, which will increase disparities, existing
disparities, and further discriminate between those that were born with impairment,
those that have acquired impairment through injury or illness, and
disability that occurs through age, and it scares
me. I urge the committee to do the right thing and scrap this bill.
I would like you to keep in mind all of our community as if we were yours.
If this bill somehow proceeds to another reading, I urge you to vote with
your conscience, as it will be your legacy.
I will end by sharing a whakatauki and a quote that I would like you to consider.
Ka mua, ka muri, walking backwards into the future.
And this quote by Sir Robert Martin,
"Though it's great that New Zealand closed its last institution, being
institutionalized is not just about the buildings, the bricks and the
mortar. It's also about the values, beliefs, actions and
activities. It's about the way things are done, the decisions that are made,
who makes them, and who has the control.
In New Zealand, we still need to work hard to ensure that people with disabilities
do not continue to be institutionalized even though they live in community
settings." Nga mihi.
Thank you, Kerry. Thank you for your heartfelt
contribution.
We are over time, but
I do want to say that
it was a very profound
submission, so thank you, and we appreciate your time. You're welcome.
Thank you very much. I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today.
Mm. Thanks. Okay.
Thank you. We now have-- Do we have Kira?
Not yet, but she said she was going to try and be on.
Okay. We'll just wait, shall we?
Okay.
All right.
I swear on.
No, it's all right. Don't
push them.
You saved the clock.
Hello.
Not yet.
She'll just be a moment.
Mm-hmm.
Cool. She's joining now.
Yeah.
Now they just have to turn on their camera and unmute.
Okay. Kera, if you can hear us, you can turn on your camera and
unmute. Ah, there we go.
Nice to see you.
Tēnā koutou.
Kia ora.
All right. Hello, I'm Dana. I am the chair today, and
we have five minutes set down for you.
Thank you for probably rushing about and joining us a bit early, and I
do appreciate that. But we are pleased to hear from
you, and the next five minutes is all yours.
Tēnā koutou. Tēnā koutou.
So kia ora, everyone. I'm Kera. I was just in front of you not
very long ago,
speaking on behalf of the DPO Coalition, and today, now
I'm speaking in my personal capacity.
So,
E Te Ōtahi, firstly want to very much thank you for making
time for me this evening.
Though I will, unfortunately, have to admit
that I did not see the email that I received
yesterday as I was unwell. So I only was aware that I
had this slot a few minutes ago when I received a call.
Oh.
So, with that, I will say that I have not prepared anything
particularly comprehensive, but while I'm here in that
personal capacity, perhaps I'll add a few points
that I haven't been able to bring up in other kōrero.
Sure.
So firstly, just to acknowledge, I'm based here in
Ōtautahi in Christchurch, and this is now my third
time in front of you all in the last week or
so. And that's because I do have some other governance and
advisory roles related to disability rights.
But in my day job, I work professionally as a consultant on
Indigenous and disability rights
and environmental kaupapa as well.
So today,
just really want to acknowledge the privilege that I'm having, effectively
because of those roles,
that I'm getting this opportunity to make a personal oral
submission. Specifically, because I was aware
that other organizations, that there was going to be an extension,
and was able to know enough about the subcommittee process to flick off an
email and say, "Please, can you include me?"
I'm
personally not somebody who receives DSS
myself, and I think that had this process been less
reactive,
it would've been really important to hear from those who do have that firsthand
knowledge,
hear from them directly.
Because while
with the short notice, I thought I'd better take this opportunity, since it's been
offered to me. Ultimately, it does not really feel fair that
I'm in front of you for a third time, while others have not even had their
one chance to present to the committee.
And, with that acknowledgment, I think I've raised
in a couple of the organizational submissions that I've been part of, that it's
really critical to our democratic process that citizens have
the opportunity to speak on legislation that affects
them. And that's much more critical, especially for disabled people, for
us to have that time, for us to have that space.
Some of us are orientated towards writing and can do brilliant
written submissions, even when it is a very condensed time
period like this one.
And others express themselves better verbally.
So, especially recognizing that this was a
consultation that came up out of the blue,
for a lot of our disabled community, this process really has not been very
accessible.
But I guess I will move on.
Just wanting to really emphasize that point, because
while I appreciate you all working into the evenings in your
individual capacities, ultimately, this process has not been good, and it has
left disabled people behind.
So I think firstly, what I would add to my
written submission that I did put in quickly before the cutoff is
that this bill ultimately, in my view, really conflates the
need for a legislative framework for DSS with
limiting Crown obligations and expenditure as a result
of that December 2025 Supreme Court decision.
Those two things do not need to go together.
They are not
naturally paired, and disabled people saying that we need to have
a legislative framework for DSS does not need to be
confused by this involvement
around the Supreme Court decision. Those are two separate things.
However, the fact of the matter is that this
bill that is before us does conflate those two things, I think rather
dangerously. And in doing so, it's created a lot
of confusion in the community, which makes it a lot harder to
engage in the first place.
But that confusion has really been around this process.
That confusion is not around what does the DSS bill need to contain?
What are the
requirements of a legislative framework?
Disabled people are not confused about that, and I'm really disappointed to
keep hearing the narrative, particularly from this minister, that
disabled people seem to just be going off misinformation.
We seem to just not know what we're talking about.
We seem to not understand that nothing's going to change.
The reality is that we have a huge amount of disabled expertise in our
community, as I mentioned earlier.
And ultimately- We know what to look for when
we're looking at legislation. We know what to look for to see
if our rights are going to be upheld, and that's why I
completely oppose this bill. I recognize the need
for legislation to underpin DSS. That
is really important, but this bill is absolutely not it,
and this bill can never be it. So I do not think that this is
something where I'm going to be suggesting amendments.
I would like to see that this goes absolutely back to the
basics, back to the very beginning, and starts with that real meaningful
engagement with disabled people that takes time, that is
accessible, that gives disabled people the opportunity
to reflect and to wananga and to have korero on an equal
basis, not something that is rushed through as a tick box exercise,
and certainly not something that takes an issue as
important as DSS and then
makes it a really reactive exercise because the Crown doesn't want to spend any
more money and doesn't want to pay people that care for disabled people.
So I think ultimately I can't see a timer, so
I'll probably just-
No, we're over time. We've got-
Cool. So I'll take the rest of my submission then as read, that
ultimately it breaches New Zealand's obligations, and I think it's
really harmful that even though, as I said, I don't
receive DSS myself, this is really harmful to disabled
people as a whole because it really entrenches that ableist
worldview that sees us as burdens to the state, to
our communities, and to whanau, and it puts us in this category
related
of other. And this, unfortunately, is a pattern that we have
seen and we're seeing currently that ultimately leads to the
justification of eugenics and genocide,
and it's also really dangerous to see the government now having a bit of a pattern-
We're going to have to-- I'm sorry, we're going to have to-
... on retrospective legislation.
Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you.
I'm sorry. Respectfully, we're going to have to stop there.
We've-- Yeah, we're well over time, man.
But thank you for-
I thought I was booked until 7:00. My email said I was 6:50 until
7:00 PM.
No, that was a slot available, but it's a five-minute submission.
Okay, I had requested extra time, but I'll leave it there and just-
Yeah
... thanks again.
Thank you. Everyone requests extra time, but sadly, we try to keep it fair to
everybody. So thank you for your time today.
Yeah, it's an accessibility thing, though, but ka pai. You have a good evening.
Sure. Okay. Thanks very much. Goodbye.
All right, team, thank you very much for your attendance today
and for
your support. Thank you to everybody down the back who has
been with us for the duration.
We will be back 8:00 in the morning
for a full